---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Corollary: Physical Globes and Digital Projections 

## Guarantor of Veracity

Because source photographs from NASA and their composite images of the
Earth can at first appear similar to what can be seen by the human eye,
an epistemic question may be asked: which authority guarantees the truth
claims for these images, and how is it possible to determine their
veracity? Moreover, the object of such qualities was not recorded as
such at any point, and there is no epistemic guarantor which stands
parallelly to the image recording, as for example photographer
witnessing the scene while recording it. So, there is none we can blame
for lying.[^1]

Without the possibility of comparing an image to the reality, and with
only a second-order shaky authority, the disappearance of perspectival
knowledge becomes an effect of New Medievalism phenomenon. Knowledge of
perspective, like the idea of the planet as a sphere, was built into the
very center of our science already by Antiquity. But this knowledge was
completely lost during Medieval times. It was reborn again with the
Renaissance recovery of geometrical perspectival thinking.[^2] But now,
with the ever-increasing use of post-digital photography for
representing the Earth, both our immediate surroundings and on the far
side of the world, again we are suffering a loss to our ability to
represent not only height, width, and depth, but our position in
relation to each other. Such New Medievalism has also had an influence
upon construction for the new scale model of planet Earth. This globe
may actually be crucial for understanding change and abolishment of
known perspective systems. In this chapter, I will analyze how our
knowledge of the planet Earth has been distorted by the media used in
its representation, and has become tied to the interface, or becoming
the interface itself in projects as Google Earth.

## Globe

A globe is a model of space presented on a three-dimensional surface.
And the idea of the world as a sphere has long been closely tied to
attempts to represent it three-dimensionally. As Benjamin Lazier wrote,
‘Globes stand before us. We observe and act upon them from without.
Globes are things that we make. They are artifacts’.[^3] Globes afford a
hypothetical view of the planet from space which is actually impossible,
a view which is enhanced by a certain distance between the person doing
the viewing of the globe itself, and a view which could never be
achieved in reality or, at least, was inaccessible until the space
programs of the late 20^th^ century and remains accessible only for a
select few privileged astronauts. Moreover, according to Angela Krewani,
notions of the globe distance humans from subjective concepts of the
Earth and world.[^4] This is because, when using a globe, we imagine the
planetary body on which we live as separate from us, thereby
objectifying it. In order to define the shape of a thing, the observer
first must be separate from that thing, and second must know their
distance relative to it. Thus, to define the shape of our planet, we
would need to have a certain distance from it.

[[[[]{#_Toc32255874 .anchor}]{#_Toc30760361 .anchor}]{#_Toc9
.anchor}]{#__RefHeading___Toc78446_3983396227 .anchor}Figure 10: Donnus
Nicholas Germanus, cartographer Johannes Schnitzer or Johannes de
Armssheim, engraver Ptolemy Jacobus Angelus, The World (the work in the
public domain)

The first representation of the planet as a globe corresponds with the
time of the early imaginings of the Earth as a sphere, dating to around
380 BCE, when a first globe made by Eudoxus of Cnidus is mentioned in a
poem by Aratus of Soli. Crates of Mallus is also said to made a globe by
150 BCE.[^5] Ptolemy’s work also refers to globes and one appears on the
frontispiece of his *Geographia*.[^6] One of the oldest globes, still
preserved today from the time of antiquity, is called the *Farnese
Atlas*, now housed in Naples, to whom Peter Sloterdijk addressed lines
in the middle part of his trilogy on *Spheres*, analyzing figure as an
allegory of power, rather than knowledge.[^7] This globe is held in
hands of a sculpted marble figure from 150 CE, which represents the god
Atlas.[^8] Tiny metal globes named *Mainz globe* and *Kugel globe* came
after.[^9] Soon after these two only few centimeters large objects, the
idea of the world as a sphere was terminated by growing doxas of
Medieval ages.

As Western civilization fell under the influence of the Christian Church
from 4^th^ to the 15^th^ centuries CE, the idea that the Earth is
spherical in shape gradually became increasingly heretical. While the
idea of the globe was absent from the West it continued to be developed
in the Arabic countries.[^10] Only after the mid-15^th^ century did the
production of the globe pick up again in Western culture, accelerated by
new discoveries. And once the practice of globe production was
reinvented, it has continued to be developed and explored, particularly
in the countries of imperialist nations, such as England, Spain and the
Netherlands, whose explorers were discovering new information about the
planet which could be included in maps and globes, as Fuller noted.[^11]
A new generation of globes was made, including the *Bernkastel-Kues
globe*.

One of the principle differences between types of globe is the
information which they carry. Until 16^th^ century, there were two types
of globes in use, celestial and terrestrial globes. For purposes of
navigation, these would be used together, supplementing each other by
describing the land and the sky, respectively, with one standing for the
positive and the other the negative of a total image, as if projected
onto concave and convex surfaces. With increasingly varied
interpretations, the information which was inscribed in globes became
richer. For example, in the 16^th^ century, terrestrial globes might
encompass a mixture of narrative and symbolic elements, including
Christian and pagan iconographies, such as cosmologies antique,
heraldic, mythological, and zodiacal, details which were deliberate
aesthetic or poetic, as well as social context. Up until the time when
the Polish mathematician and astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus (1473-1543)
wrote *On the Revolution of the Heavenly Spheres* (1514), sources about
the sphericity of the Earth was primarily limited to antique writings of
Ptolemy and calculations or notes left by of sailors. The knowledge
about the shape of the Earth changes further with Gemma Frisius’ *On the
Principles of Astronomy and Cosmography, with Instruction for the Use of
Globes, and Information on the World and on Islands and Other Places
Recently Discovered by 1529*. This book summarized all of the knowledge
that was used in practice by sailors, providing a compendium of most of
accessible knowledge of the time.

Still, not only general knowledge about the planet but also its precise
measurements were necessary in order to produce these accurate ‘3D
maps’. Starting in the 16^th^ century, after the projections calculated
by Flemish geographer Gerardus Mercator, globes began to be used as
precise tools for geographical orientation.[^12] Mercator introduced a
projection of the three-dimensional planet onto a flat two-dimensional
surface that would serve as the base calculus for representations of the
Earth over the next hundreds of years, and is even used today in the
Google Earth project. From the 17^th^ to the 19^th^ centuries, numerous
models of globe covers were designed. The azimuthal is still used today,
as is Gleason’s, which is important to the Flat Earthers.

[[[]{#_Toc32255875 .anchor}]{#_Toc30760362
.anchor}]{#__RefHeading___Toc78444_3983396227 .anchor}Figure 11:
[]{#_Toc10 .anchor}Martin Behaim, Globe (Nouveau Larousse illustré, the
work in the public domain)[^13]

Across time, globes have been made from many kinds of materials, with
some more expensive and some more luxurious than others. At the turn of
the 16^th^ century, each globe was a unique object, made manually, and
decorated, painted, or sculpted by hand. Because of their uniqueness,
which was similar to the uniqueness of manuscripts, Sylvia Sumira,
specialist in the conservation of printed globes, named the globes
produced at the time ‘manuscript globes’.[^14] And indeed, printed
information was often attached to the wood structure from which some
globes were carved. As with books, the invention of the printing press
greatly diminished the labor costs for the production of globes,
rendering them more affordable. In the late 15^th^ and early 16^th^
centuries, Martin Waldseemüller, who is credited with the first recorded
usage of the word America in honor of Amerigo Vespucci, was also the
first to produce a printed globe. These processes in turn would enhance
the future mass production of globes. With the invention of the printing
press, complex calculations could now be undertaken to produce the gore
of a globe.

The gore was literally a sheet of paper. It was designed for the sphere
of a globe. And it was printed with a map and geographic information
which, once cut, would perfectly match the surface area of the spherical
globe. This gore was a way of representing 3D space in a 2D print, and
was designed as a series of thin vertical sections printed on a single
piece of paper which, when cut and glued onto the surface of the globe,
depicted the sphere of the Earth. Variations to the design of the gore
might include its size, production materials, surface quality, and
information. Some producers explored the production of miniature globes,
while others, like Vinzenzo Coronelli, produced globes with a diameter
of one meter or more, as with the *Marly Globe* (1688). One globe which
was uniquely tailored, and described with substantial detail in the
history of globes by Sumira, is Abraham Nathan Myers’ globe from 1866.
This globe is a 3D puzzle, in which the surface as well as subface of
the sphere is dissected into eight layers, each of which consists of an
additional six cuts.[^15] The purpose of the globe was educational. To
compile the information from the globe, its sections had to first be
arranged into shape of the ball, and using the information which was
represented on its printed texture or gore.[^16]

[]{#__RefHeading___Toc76924_3983396227 .anchor}

Throughout the centuries, globes have also been desirable objects which
decorated the libraries and living rooms of the upper class. This can be
seen, for example, in the work room depicted in the *Geographer*
(1668-9), a painting by the 17^th^ century Dutch artist Johannes
Vermeer. Three hundred years later, however, with the mass production of
globes in the 20^th^ century, these illustrational and informational
spheres have become a common decorative element in public and personal
libraries as well as also practical tool used in school. Also, many
playful variants on the idea of the globe have been invented, such as
the balloon globe, ball globe, and lighting globe, which can also be
used in toy designs. In fact, today the majority of physical, spherical
models of the Earth which exist and are still in active use are those
which serve as toys for young children or for pet animals, who play with
them like the actor Charlie Chaplin did in the satirical film *The Great
Dictator* mentioned in the Introduction. And there are fewer and fewer
decorative globes standing on the writing desks of academics and
politicians or in the working rooms of institutions and libraries, as
there has been for some five centuries.

Today, the over-exploitation of globes for non-educational purposes has
produced a strong reaction among many artists, who respond by
intervening in the discourse about globes and the practice of
globe-making through personalizing them. As the terrestrial part of the
Earth has by now been fully discovered, and a globe which represents the
surface landmass has been made into a mechanically-reproducible object,
artists have started to reinvent its use. Some examples include Yves
Klein’s *Blue Globe* (1957), Claudio Parmiggiani’s *Pelle Mondo* (1969),
and the many globes made by Dimitrije ‘Mangelos’ Bašičević. Such
artistic experiments with the globes culminated during the time of James
Lovelock’s thesis of Gaia in which he claimed that the planet is a
self-sustainable system like an organism.[^17]

The materials used to model and conceptualize the Earth have gradually
shifted from dimensional globes to dimensionless globes. A large number
of the globes which are produced today are neither concretely physical
nor as stable and fixed as sculptural objects as they once were. For
example, Andreas Riedl describes virtual hyperglobe, such as Google
Earth, the tactile hyperglobe, which serves as an interface, and the
hologlobe, which is a holographic projection.[^18] The digital or
virtual globe serves both as a data cloud as well as a visual metaphor,
simultaneously having a powerful influence on our lives materially and
with all-to-real consequences, as it begins to be the only Earth that we
know. Such virtual globes can function on a different level of
complexity than can physical ones, simultaneously providing us with many
layers of variously coded information, which in turn influences our
experience and understanding of the Earth itself.[^19]

For example, Ingo Günther makes numerous references to the shape of the
world in his media art. He has made approximately two hundred globes,
including tactile hyper globes, such as in his *Geospace Project*,
*Omniglobe*, *Terravision,* *Magic Planet*, and others, but also
hologlobes, such as *Perspecta* by Actuality systems (2002) and
*Heliodisplay* (2005).[^20] Günther’s series *The World Processor*
powered by Geo-Cosmos WP(x)GC (2013), produced in collaboration with the
Miraikan National Museum of Emerging Science and Innovation in Tokyo, is
built around the idea of the digital globe as a physical object in space
which has been made into a projective surface in order to host various
data. Still, Günther is not trying to present a realistic image of the
Earth through his globes, but rather to visualize information about the
Earth. When an audience interacts with *World Processor*, it displays
various data and data visualizations on the surface of the globe, such
as data on population, life on the planet, languages used, the laying of
fiber optics, life expectancy, or geopolitical symbols. Therefore, like
in early days of globe production, this globe carries data which is
iconographically, symbolically, heraldically, or zodiacally
contextualized, bringing extended information up and onto a visible
surface.[^21] Such globes, whether in the media arts or beyond, are the
rare instances where the idea of the Earth as a sphere have survived.

The model of planet Earth slowly dematerialized in digital hyperimages
which consist of photographs and maps, but also other data. As globes
have vanished as functional physical objects, in the following
subsections, I will give further attention to two types of data that
would be applied to contemporary data globes: photographic or visual
layouts which bring the visual appearance and recognition, and mapping
measure that add the precision, as well as their integration into
hybrids. I will analyze two forms, the landscape and a map, separately,
then following their merge in hybrid forms, trying to understand what
their gains and losses in description of the planet are. Although our
actual place can indicate certain elements of the shape of the planet,
there are various reasons that prevent us from experiencing it.

[^1]: Which is a precondition for a lie in photography, according saying
    attributed to Lewis Hine: ‘Photographs don’t lie, but liars may
    photograph’.

[^2]: Leon Battista Alberti, *On Painting*, Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press, 2011.

[^3]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc78006_3983396227 .anchor} Benjamin Lazier,
    ‘Earthrise; or, The Globalization of the World Picture’, *The
    American Historical Review* 116.3 (2011): 614.

[^4]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc78004_3983396227 .anchor} Angela Krewani,
    ‘Google Earth: Satellite Images and the Appropriation of the Divine
    Perspective’, in Solvejg Nitzke and Nicolas Pethes (eds) *Imaging
    Earth: Concepts of Wholeness in Cultural Constructions of Our Home
    Planet,* Berlin: Transcript Verlag, 2018, 45-60.

[^5]: Sylvia Sumira, *Globes*: *400 Years of Exploitation, Navigation,
    and Power*, Chicago: Chicago University Press, 2014, p. 13. See
    also: David Woodward and RB Harley, *The History of Cartography,
    Volume 1: Cartography in Prehistoric, Ancient and Medieval Europe
    and the Mediterranean*, University of Chicago Press, 1987.

[^6]: Ptolemy, *Geographia*. Accessible at
    https://archive.org/details/claudiiptolemaei02ptol.

[^7]: Peter Sloterdijk, *Spheres, Volume 2, Globes: Macrospherology*,
    South Pasadena: Semiotext(e), 2014.

[^8]: In Roman mythology, Atlas was one of the Titans, cursed by Zeus to
    stand on the Western edge of Gaia to carry the sky, or, according to
    some, the celestial bodies.

[^9]: The Mainz and Kugel globes are Roman celestial globes from 2nd
    century A.D. The first one is kept in Mainz, while the second is in
    Paris.

[^10]: Sumira, *Globes.*

[^11]: Buckminster Fuller, *Operating Manual for Spaceship Earth*.

[^12]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77998_3983396227 .anchor} Mercator was also
    the first person to name a book of maps after the Roman god Atlas.

[^13]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77996_3983396227 .anchor} *Behaim Globe*
    was named after Martin Behaim from Nurnberg was the first to start a
    larger production of globes by the end of the century.

[^14]: Sumira, *Globes*, 14.

[^15]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77992_3983396227 .anchor} The idea of the
    gore was elaborated by many but Fuller’s projection Dymaxion shape
    made by Buckminster Fuller might be the most challenging. His
    dymaxion (from; dynamic, maximum, and tension). His projection of a
    gore was made in order to show all the continents are connected as
    an island. See: Buckminster Fuller, *Operating Manual for the
    Spaceship Earth.*

[^16]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77990_3983396227 .anchor} Sumira, *Globes,*
    35-36.

[^17]: James Lovelock, *Gaia: A New Look at Life on Earth*, Oxford/New
    York: Oxford University Press, 2000.

[^18]: Riedl, ‘Digital Globes’, in W. Cartwright, M.P. Peterson, and G.
    Gartner (eds) *Multimedia Cartography*, Berlin/Heidelberg/New York:
    Springer, 2007, 256.

[^19]: See Manuel deLanda, *Assemblage Theory: Speculative Realism,*
    Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2016.

[^20]: See Ingo Gunther, ‘Ingo Gunther’, https://ingogunther.com.

[^21]: Similarly, Google Ocean consists of icons and symbols. Helmreich
    writes: ‘Google Ocean as existential graph is a logical diagram that
    conjoins multiple representations, real and fictive, and multiple
    semiotic registers, iconic, indexical, symbolic, which can operate
    independently of one another (in different layers) while still
    forming part of a composite.’ See Stefan Helmreich, ‘From Spaceship
    Earth to Google Ocean: Planetary Icons, Indexes, and
    Infrastructures’, *Social Research* 78.4 (2011): 1235.
