---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Chapter 3: Image of the Globe 

## Widening the View 

Historically, aerial photographs were the first media in which the total
image which before had only been imagined in maps was actually realized.
Aerial recording technologies afforded images which are compatible
neither with photographs taken from the land, tied as they are to the
horizon as their reference, nor architectural plans, with their
perspectival illusion. Such high oblique aerial image did not include
the horizon. In order to record the world from a distance science and
technology would first have to achieve two innovations: technologies for
flight and powerful telescope optical systems.[^1] Photography of the
Earth from space led to substantial changes in the use of the globe as a
tool, by distancing from it.

This history begins with a photograph taken by American Army Air Corps
officer and aerial photographer Captain Albert Stevens in South Dakota
on November 11, 1935 while flying the Explorer II craft, which at the
time set the world record of an altitude of 22,066 meters, and the first
image to depict the round-appearing horizon of the Earth. American
astronaut John Glenn was the next to record this surface of the Earth
during the first American orbital spaceflight of the Mercury-Atlas 6 in
1962. After this, astronauts recorded a number of images that changed
the way we see the planet, from *Earthrise* (1968), to the *Blue Marble*
or *22727* (1972), to the *Pale Blue Dot* (1990). Perhaps the most
well-known of these images is the black and white *Earthrise*, recorded
by astronaut William Anders during the Apollo 8 mission on Christmas Eve
of 1968, the first photo of the Earth from the Moon. It was taken from
distance of 45,000 km using a Hasselblad camera, 80 mm lenses, and 70 mm
film which had to be brought back physically from outer space to be
developed. Almost twenty years later, another iconic image, the *Pale
Blue Dot* was taken, commissioned by astronomer and author Carl Sagan,
and recorded by the Voyager 1 upon leaving the solar system at a
distance from the Earth of more than 6.4 billion kilometers, capturing
what Hannah Arendt described as the story of our departure from the
human condition. [^2] In the years since, NASA has continued to produce
new images of the Earth, such as with the project *Blue Marble: The Next
Generation* (2012), which has made available the observation of change
in the planet since this recording was initiated.

[]{#_Toc32255880 .anchor}Figure 16: Capt. Albert Stevens’ record from
South Dakota, 1935 (work in the public domain)

[[]{#_Toc32255881 .anchor}]{#_Toc30760367 .anchor}Figure 17: Capt.
William Anders, Earthrise, 1968 (NASA, work in public domain)

[[]{#_Toc32255882 .anchor}]{#_Toc30760368 .anchor}Figure 18: Eugene
Cernan, Ronald Evans and Harrison Schmitt, Blue Marble, 1972 (NASA, work
in the public domain)

## Global and Single World

[[]{#_Toc32255883 .anchor}]{#_Toc30760369 .anchor}Figure 19: One of
globalization images (the work in CC0 license)

The first images of the Earth from space in the 1960s had a profound
cultural impact on us, its inhabitants. Among the many newly-emerging
references to the planet as a unique whole, two main approaches are
distinguishable, according to Denis Cosgrove: One-World, the unitary
approach of advocates for globalization on the basis of economics, and
Whole Earth, a theory where an ecological standpoint is taken.[^3] The
first may have in some form already been promoted by US President Lyndon
Baines Johnson (LBJ) in the 1960s, given that he was among the first to
distribute the *Earthrise* photograph. Consequently, today *Earthrise*
has become a symbol of globalization representing ideas of connectivity
and networking, as well as a symbol of economic and financial systems,
such as the World Bank, but also the World Wide Web and Internet. For
this reason, Benjamin Lazier, call our present time the ‘Earthrise
era’.[^4]

Looking back on the evolution of spaceflight since the 20^th^ century
and of space photography since the 1960s, it is incredible what a
profound impact these visuals, or more precisely these photographs, have
had on our understanding of the mother Earth. Yet, flat Earth skeptics
claim that these are just images, that none are true, and that none can
be trusted. In fact, these images have indeed been recorded in such a
way that a human could never see their subject using only their naked
eye. These images dislocated the viewer from their place down on Earth,
replacing the subjectively-viewed landscapes for transsubjectively-
viewed maps.

## Global world Splitting Apart 

In the years since, these images of the Earth have been used again and
again to the point where they have become a graphic icon. ‘\[I\]deas of
globalization draw their expressive and political force’ from these
planetary images, Denis Cosgrove claims.[^5] As John Pickles noted, ‘The
globe has served as an icon for expansive capitalism and
nationalism’.[^6] The principle representation for globalization is, of
course, the image of a ‘global earth’. While paradoxically, this icon of
the Earth suggests both the globalist drive itself as well as how the
achievement of globalism will undoubtedly come at a cost to the planet’s
biodiversity and ecosystem. Thus, Bill McKibben noted that we no longer
live on the *Blue Marble* as pictured in 1972 but rather on an
inhospitable planet.[^7] Other authors also pointed out that the impact
of humans on the planet is all the more visible from outer space.[^8]

The destructiveness to the planet from industry which develops part and
parcel alongside globalization is closely related to the theory of the
Whole Earth, according to Cosgrove, as exhibited, for example, in *The
Whole Earth Catalogue* by Stewart Brand printed from 1968 to 1971.[^9]
Through this *Catalogue*, Brand promoted a critical standpoint on how
the idea of the globe should be implemented. Spaceflight has enabled the
recording of the Earth as a sphere from the distant position of outer
space, making the whole planet look like a miniature ball, almost a toy
or some dummy model. Thus, late-20^th^ century images of the Earth not
only matched but illustrated Lovelock’s thesis on Gaia as a
self-sustainable system.[^10] Not long after *The Whole Earth
Catalogue*, as Bruno Latour criticized, even the Whole Earth theory
itself was appropriated into environmental criticism. And the Earth has
become a ‘signifier for one collective existence’, wrote Tobias
Boes.[^11] That is, images of the Earth have ceased to be only just
iconic, and resemble that which they represents, the Earth itself, but
have also become symbolic, encoded layer upon layer of
culturally-learned interpretations and meanings.

## Global Connectivity

Finally, in addition to these two approaches to images of the Earth that
have developed since the 1960s, One-world and Whole Earth theories,
images of the Earth have become a symbol of our connectivity. This is
due at least in part to astronomical imaging techniques which make
visible the Earth in ways that humans cannot themselves naturally see,
as well as astronomical imaging programs which are run over extended
periods of time. For example, from 1959 to 1972, the Corona
reconnaissance satellite program resulted in a number of panoramic
images of the Earth which are classified still to this day. Since then,
various space agencies all around the world have launched a huge number
of unmanned satellites from the Earth’s surface and into outer space
which can directly record images of the Earth, including those not
necessary within the light spectrum visible to humans, leading to new
kinds of visual records. One of the longest running is the Landsat
satellite program, launched in 1972, and jointly operated by the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the United
States Geological Survey (USGS), which has been running since the early
1970s.[^12] One of the best known of such imaging systems was the
Advanced Research and Global Observation Satellite (ARGOS), launched in
1999 and terminated in 2003.

With the merging of systems for visual representation and data location,
locating data occurred with the first GPS monitored by 24 satellites,
three of which are needed to map the mobile device, by triangulation. In
addition to these, more satellites for specific purposes, such as Ikonos
or GeoSci, were used in order to produce what we know today as the
‘digital globe’. Some of these projects include NASA’s World Wind
(2004), Virtual Earth by Microsoft, today a part of Bing Maps (2005),
Earth browser (2008), to name but a few. Google Earth itself relies on
images from the satellites of NASA and the USGS, including Landsat 8 and
previously Landsat 7, as well as various aerial images and crowd-sourced
GIS mapping platforms such as Panoramio, which incorporated millions of
geotagged photographs which were also used in early days of Google
Earth. Today, the images of the Google Earth are not crowdsourced, as
they were at the beginning of the project, but directly recorded by
satellite light detection and ranging systems. The ever less-and-less
blue and green surface of the Earth is computed from images transmitted
by low-orbit satellites only 800 kilometers distant from the surface.
Google claims that these satellites based camera systems are focused on
15 centimeters, with positional accuracy less than 1 meter above the
Earth’s surface so as to maintain no visible loss to resolution.[^13]
Being so close, the satellites cannot supply one image of the whole
Earth. Moreover, because of the curvature of the Earth, an image of the
entire sphere of the Earth cannot be taken at once or even
simultaneously. Therefore, Google muse use many images of the Earth
taken from many places. Due to the high demands of this process of
recording, to be up to date, images must be taken continuously across a
three-year period. But this causes some images of some parts of the
Earth to be asynchronous with others. The diachronic view of the images
from Google Earth is further enhanced by its ‘historical imagery’
feature, which shows before and after sequences of this image record.
Thus, while offering a total image across space, this total image is
segmented and assembled from substantially different images. Google
Earth offers pictures from various time periods combined into a single
representation of the Earth.

## Earth as Symbol 

As Stefan Helmreich sees the situation, in an application of Charles
Sanders (C.S.) Peirce’s semiotic triad, Google Earth is ‘a mixture of
representation forms. Indexical: satellite images. Iconic: road maps.
Symbolic: nation state boundaries’.[^14] The resulting total image is
itself more of an aggregate image than an indexical photograph. Although
we tend to perceive Google Earth as being indexical rather than
aggregate. Once merged into Google Earth, however, these image records
produce an illusion which does not fully provide an experience of three
dimensions, as such. Indeed, Alexander Galloway wrote about how:

> \[N\]o longer will the viewer experience montage via cuts over time,
> proceeding from shot to shot, one must now “cut” (but in its opposite,
> as “suturing”) within any given frame, holding two or more source
> images side by side which themselves will persist montage-free over
> much longer “takes” than their cinematic predecessors.[^15]

Moreover, any information that is found to be missing from between
images within this image composite are generated algorithmically.[^16]
They are mathematical computations produced out of many different
systems for detecting light, from visible light to the infrared
spectrum. Combining images from various times with maps, and merging
them algorithmically, it creates a total image which is more fiction
than document.

## Travelling around Digital Globe 

Today, composites images of the Earth such as virtual globes are more
complex than being simply a set of joint or merged images. Google Earth
now represents data for the entire globe of the Earth, a place we once
understood and imagined only on the basis of our own personal,
subjective point of view. Thus, virtual globes such as Google Earth may
alienate us from experiencing our own habitat. While in the early 16^th^
century sailors first circumnavigated the globe, inspiring a renaissance
in globe making, in the early 21^st^ century virtual globes replace this
idea of coming to understand the Earth through the visual and tactile
exploration of its sphericity with travel inside of its imaging.

That is, these new digital models of the Earth allow the interactor or
user to navigate within an image, from macro to micro and back again,
from a wide view to the smallest detail, as shown in *Powers of Ten*
mentioned in the Introduction. Through functions such as magnification
or zooming, a user can move close to or even inside the detail, which in
turn produces the effect of movement through space, and thus an illusion
of three dimensionality. Beyond these viewing options, several other
kinds of interaction with the images are enhanced, such as the movements
up-down, left-right, and forward-back.[^17] Even so, more complicated
motions such as combining left-forward are not available in the system.
And rather than create a natural and embodied feeling of movement
through a three-dimensional space, ultimately, the interaction feels
unnatural and even ‘robotized’ because the flow is not smooth but rather
broken into metered sequences or stages. The space represented by such
an image, such as Google Earth or Google Street View, although it exists
as a three-dimensional architecture, still consists only of many
two-dimensional records. Thus, the space is actually sliced into layers,
each of which is constrained to the apparatus of the screen.

Has Globe Lost its Importance?

The Google Earth project is one of several digital projects for imaging
the Earth in which some degree of animation serves as the interface by
which people interact with the sphere.[^18]

Yet such model of the Earth as a sphere no longer has the same function
that it once did. Even when using projects such as Google Earth, we
navigate an electronic galaxy not some global exploration.[^19] We have
at least to a certain extent outlived the usefulness of representing the
Earth as a globe. Certainly, globalization has brought people into a
greater degree of interconnectivity, making physical distances less and
less relevant for work and home life. And with the iconization of images
of the whole Earth, which in design and style make it appear flat, the
representation of the planet as a sphere is rarely in daily use. By
stepping back from the various processes of recording images of the
planet, we have also excluded ourselves from the act of understanding
our own habitat.

In order to explain how these total images have had a profound impact on
our understanding of the very planet on which we live, in the Chapter 4
I will analyze two concepts, space and place, through a sociological
framework, and apply these concepts to discussions from the field of
geography and differences between the landscape and a map. Today, the
Earth is no longer recorded from any one specific position in the
universe, not even the most one of a drone pilot or space astronaut. New
photographic technologies are automated. And these post-digital
photographic devices assemble and compute a total image out of many
other images. These images become ‘hyperobjects’, to employ Timothy
Morton’s term, a complex non-material structure that can have a
significant impact on our lives.[^20]

[^1]: After Galileo Galilei’s telescope, significant inventions would
    also include, for example, the refracting telescope as well as the
    astronomical revolving unit.

[^2]: Arendt*,* ‘The Human Condition’. Eventually, *Pale Blue Dot* was
    distributed by US president Lindon Johnson among world leaders.
    While the Soviets certainly pursued and made great achievements in
    their own space program, they did not record any image. See: Sagan,
    *Pale Blue Dot.*

[^3]: Denis Cosgrove, ‘Contested Global Visions: One-World, Whole Earth,
    and the Apollo Space Photograph’, 84.2 (June 1994): 270-294.

[^4]: #  Lazier, ‘Earthrise’, 605.

[^5]: Cosgrove, *Apollo’s Eye.*

[^6]: John Pickles, *A History of Spaces: Cartographic Reason, Mapping
    and the Geo-Coded World,* London: Routledge, 2003, 8.

[^7]: He writes: ‘Imagine we live on a planet. Not our cozy,
    taken-for-granted earth, but a planet, a real one, with melting
    poles and dying forests and a heaving, corrosive sea, raked by
    winds, strafed by storms, scorched by heat. An inhospitable place.’
    Bill McKibben, *Eaarth: Making a Life on a Tough New*
    *Planet*, London: St. Martin's Griffin, 2011.

[^8]: Krewani, ‘Google Earth’.

[^9]: The iconic image of the whole Earth has been widely referred, and
    Whole Earth theory widely analyzed, by culturalists, including
    Stewart Brand’s *Whole Earth Catalogue*, printed 1968-1971 in
    Sausalito, which was followed by *CoEvolution Quarterly* in period
    1974-1984, and *New Whole Earth Catalogue* in 1980. Since then,
    Brand has further developed his early work in *Whole Earth
    Discipline: An Ecopragmatist Manifesto*, New York: Viking, 2009.
    Brand’s works have also been recently revived through a spectrum of
    Anthropocene theories presented by Anselm Franke and Diedrich
    Diederichsen (eds) *The Whole Earth Catalogue: The Whole Earth
    California and the Disappearance of the Outside*, Berlin: Sternberg
    Press, 2013.

[^10]: Lovelock, *Gaia. *

[^11]: Tobias Boes, ‘Beyond Whole Earth: Planetary Mediation and the
    Anthropocene’, *Environmental Humanities* 5.1 (2014): 155-170. See
    Also: Yaakov Jerome Garb, ‘The Use and Misuse of the Whole Earth
    Image’, *Whole Earth Review* (March 1985): 18-25.

[^12]: For Landsat, an autonomous real-time ground ubiquitous monitoring
    system is employed. Its images are also used in today’s Google
    Earth.

[^13]: Google Answers:
    https://support.google.com/mapsdata/answer/6261838?hl=en.

[^14]: Helmreich, ‘From Spaceship Earth to Google Ocean’, 1222.

[^15]: Galloway, *The Interface Effect*, 114-115.

[^16]: For this purpose, some contemporary image processing systems
    include DSMAC (digital scene matching area code), which is used for
    image comparison, as well as DARPA’s ‘Mind’s Eye’, a kind of
    artificial intelligence known as visual intelligence (VI).

[^17]: For the limitations of travel in Google Earth, see also: Hoelzl
    and Marie, *Softimage*.

[^18]: Google Earth was developed from Earth Viewer 3D by Keyhole Inc,
    2001.

[^19]: Cosgrove, ‘Contested Global Visions’.

[^20]: Timothy Morton, *Hyperobjects*, Minneapolis: University of
    Minnesota Press, 2013.
