---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Chapter 4: Landscapes and Maps 

## Seeing and Imagining 

Even given all of the differences between landscapes and maps, which are
indeed substantial, both record an image of the world on a
two-dimensional surface. Yet, philosophers often divide these ways of
representing space as being conceptually opposed and contrasting.[^1]
And historians, in turn, apply this dualism to the history of Western
art in order to categorize the landscape and map as emerging from
irrational and rational drives, respectively. Further, until relatively
recently, these visual representations have to a large extent belonged
to the different disciplines of art and geography.[^2] And, overall,
when or where both are actually used in field of geography, the
landscape serves the purpose of topography, as an arrangement of the
natural and artificial surface shapes of land or sea, and the map serves
the purpose of cartography, as a practice of diagrammatic representation
of an area and its features such as cities and roads. Moreover, these
two genres of images, the landscape and map, are interpreted by art
historians as formative in the divide between realism and abstraction.
Thus, the distinction between landscape and map in geography as well as
art history also intersects and overlaps with the distinction between
vision and visualization in visual studies.

                        **Landscape**                    **Map**
  --------------------- -------------------------------- -------------------------------------
  Geography             Topography                       Cartography
  Discipline            Arts                             Geography
  Visual studies        Vision                           Visualization
  Media                 Photography                      Drawing
  Space studies         Place                            Space
  Subject-positioning   Author-centered; single-viewed   Audience-centered; multiple entries

[[]{#_Toc32170948 .anchor}]{#_Toc31046555 .anchor}Table 3: Dualistic
split between landscapes and maps

In the field of visual studies, this dualism between the landscape and
map is attributed with even further connotations, as is perhaps most
commonly exemplified by the distinction between photographic and drawing
mediums. Yet, few authors define these distinctions in depth. Gilles
Deleuze and Félix Guattari crucially define how these genre situate the
viewer: ‘A map has multiple entryways, as opposed to the tracing, which
always comes back “to the same.”’[^3] In other words, the landscape
relies most upon the subjective gaze of its creator, while the map
relies most upon the subjective gaze of their user. But also, these
genre categories are about fundamentally different things, as the
landscape describes place, and the map describes space. Thus, the image
of a landscape is self-referential and can be interpreted in and of
itself. Whereas the image of a map is externally referential and can
only be interpreted in the context of that which it represents.

## Landscapes and Maps as Preferences 

Both the imaging practices for mapping and landscape have evolved
alongside the advancement of technology. During each period in history
there have been different capacities for the production of
representations of space and place. But also, preference for specific
types of representation shifted over time. So, in Antiquity, the
Medieval Period, and the Renaissance, people overall preferred the map,
while later periods, especially the 17^th^ to 19^th^ centuries, people
were most fascinated with the colorful, dramatic, and romantic
landscape.

[[]{#_Toc32255884 .anchor}]{#_Toc31046556 .anchor}Figure 20: Monk of
Colmar, *Peutinger’s Map,* 1265 (the work in the public domain)

Maps are the oldest abstract representations of space. And even today,
children develop a cartographic literacy to one degree or another,
whether through the study of geography in school or using applications
on their smart phones. However, the first maps in Antiquity were more
approximate than they were based on a system of measurement.[^4] Part of
the reason for this was that they did not serve the same purposes of
navigation and orientation as maps do today, and because there was no
widely agreed upon system for notation in maps.[^5] For a long time,
notation systems were flexible or unclear. But in order for a map to be
a map, essentially, one needs to have an agreed upon and fixed measuring
system, a set of rules for the composition, and consistent methods of
reproduction. Thus, Denis Wood, John Fels and John Krygier claim that no
maps existed before 1400, or maybe even 1500, at least in the sense that
we understand the idea of the map today.[^6] Even if some maps dated to
Antiquity have been found, they served more of a decorative rather than
a navigational purpose.[^7] For the greater part of history, maps did
not serve the purpose of navigating the world but to illustrate the way
we humans conceive the world around us. Both the *ecumene* of Classical
Antiquity as well as the *mappa mundi* of the Medieval Period
represented the world which their creators thought as if it was the
whole planet. Of course, at the time, the other parts of the Earth which
we know about today had not yet been discovered. And, consequently,
these maps depicted the earth as flat, and left out the *antoecumene,*
opposite quarter of the earth, or southern half of the hemisphere.[^8]

This ‘whole world’ theory is exquisitely recorded, for example, in the
*Tabula Peutingeriana* or Peutinger’s Table. This 6.74-meter-long
panoramic scroll depicted a roster of the *cursus publicus* or road
network which connected Constantinople to more than five hundred Roman
cities and thousands of other sites.[^9] The *Tabula* served to map the
late Roman Empire to the fullest extent possible at the time and
revealed the spectacular size of the Roman’s domain. Because of its
layout, however, Peutinger’s Table has remained one of the greatest
enigmas of Roman cartography. During the Medieval Period, the *Tabula*
was reintroduced and along with it the idea of the planet as flat. Of
course, the world was not represented as a spherical globe in the
Tabula, even though this reality already common knowledge for ancient
Greek cartographers, but rather as flat plane.[^10] Consequently,
historians have interpreted Peutinger’s Table as a sign of decay in
knowledge about space from Antiquity to the Medieval Period.[^11]

The Roman original *Tabula Peutingeriana* from Antiquity has either not
yet been found or has not survived. What has been preserved is a
Medieval copy made by a French monk in the town of Colmar around 1265.
This copy references the original, which is believed to have been
created between the 4^th^ and 5^th^ centuries CE during reign of the
Roman Emperor Augustus.[^12] As depicted in the *Tabula*, the geographic
sites were constructed after the 4^th^ century. And given the toponymic
names for these sites, used in the manner customary during the Roman
imperial period, the original map is usually considered to have
originated at that time. In addition, because the toponyms are written
in declinations, the map seems to have been revised in latter age, when
these grammar rules as such had already been established.[^13] Besides
this, however, some of illustrations do in fact resemble the
architectures found at the respective sites. For example, the landmarks
of Rome, Constantinople, and Antioch are represented using columns or
arches particular to that location. Most sites, however, are marked with
far more generic icons. These consist of two general types: the
house-like and courtyard-like. Although there is no legend explaining
this categorization. Both types of icons, however, are drawn from a
bird’s eye or aerial view, as if seen from above, rather than not in the
frontal or oblique view. Retrospectively, from our understanding today,
such a viewpoint gives the map a visual aesthetic or style like that in
aerial photography. The other information in the map is schematic, both
simplified and symbolic. Cities and roads are laid out upon the flat
surface, and the complexity of the Adriatic landscape it reduced to
barriers set out in front of a traveler, as are the rivers and largest
mountains ranges. Compared to the much older map, but also to
contemporary maps, distances in the *Peutingeriana* seem to be
approximate, as if the official measuring systems of Roman cartography,
or the system developed by Hippodamus, was never consulted. Being
entirely abstract rather than realistic, clearly the *Tabula
Peutingeriana* represents knowledge of the land rather than the land
itself. Thus, while resembling a map, it doid not rely on any known
precise measure.

Indeed, the *Tabula Peutingeriana* is really neither a map nor a
landscape because as a visual artifact it is imagined rather than either
measured or observed. In other words, the map records temporal rather
than spatial dimensions, indicating the geographic duration that a
journey might take rather than the geographic length between the points
being depicted.[^14] Taking in consideration how the map represents only
roads and various cities, it may even be assumed that it represents a
kind of ‘travelogue’.[^15] This spatial distortion of the referential
subject of the map, which presents more of an itinerary than a roadmap,
may be due to the choice of the vehicle, such as a boat or a horse
carriage.

After a time in the late Medieval Period and early Renaissance when maps
were being repeated and reprinted, an age of discovery, as well as of
colonialism, exploration, and imperialism, brought with it a renewed
interest in maps and map-making.[^16] For example, in 1346 Fra Paolino
da Venezia made *Civitas Venetiarum*, a map of of the city Venice, which
in 1572 to 1617 led to the large cartographic project *Civitates Orbis
Terrarum*, a great atlas edited by Georg Braun and illustrated by Franz
Hogenberg. Published in six volumes, this atlas had 546 maps of
different European cities, all of which simulated an aerial or bird’s
eye view which. at the time was inaccessible to humans. Yet, these maps
had the purpose of representing a small area rather than a big region.
Only in the 19^th^ century, with the influence of the work of German
geographers Alexander von Humboldt and Carl Ritter, did maps begin to
locate a specific place within the context of a general space; that is,
of the whole Earth.

Cartographic reasoning has been at the heart of the Western thought
since the dawn of the age of discovery. Maps were the product of
scientific discoveries but also imperial tendencies. By the time of
18^th^ century, the surface of the Earth had been mostly discovered,
leaving only a few places yet unknown. ‘It is not a new terra incognita
for explorers in colonial headgear. It is by no means a res nullius,
ready to be appropriated’, wrote Latour, describing that time.[^17]
Slowly each undiscovered country that had been vaguely represented in
maps disappeared. With the loss of the sense of mystery surrounding
these territories, the map primarily become a tool for navigation of the
known world, rather than for illustration of the unknown world, and this
remains its function today. With the closing in and completion of this
total image of the world, cartographers went on to draw its ever-smaller
details and, as Virilio notes, the map began more and more to be copied
rather than created, with the landscape as a genre again becoming a more
frequently employed means for the representation of space.[^18]

At the time when more attention was being given to the details in maps
than map-making itself, the interest in the map was replaced by interest
in the landscape. The image of the landscape occurred on an iconographic
or symbolic level already by the 15^th^ century. Still, it took a few
centuries for the landscape genre to flourish. And only between the
17^th^ and the 19^th^ century did the landscape become a dominant art
genre. With the Industrial Revolution, however, landscape painting
became more and more important, as if a harbinger of the world-scale
problems which this progress would lead to.[^19] In paintings by British
artists John Constable and J.M.W. Turner, for example, a warning appears
to have been issued about industrialization and the consequent pollution
or, at least, the paintings can be interpreted this way in the light of
history).[^20] Unfortunately, the teachings of such landscape painters
were not recognized until more recently, when the consequences of the
coal industry among others has reached a tipping point. Today, in an
time not only of climate change but of climate crisis, landscapes are
frequently employed to depict the loss of nature, while maps can be used
to demonstrate the changes in the environment which have been introduced
by humans show the destruction and intrusions of industry into this
land.

The last moment in history in which the landscape held vital importance
in the visual arts and for visual representation coincided with the
invention of the photograph, which itself was a consequence of the
Industrial Revolution of the 18^th^ and 19^th^ centuries. With the
invention of camera technology, the photographic medium achieved greater
and greater significance in the arts, relegating the painterly genre of
the landscape to ‘Sunday painters’ in the open air. Indeed, Denis
Cosgrove claims that as a visual genre in the 19^th^ century the
landscape was again replaced by the map, at least in part because it was
in this moment that visual tools other than painting become capable of
naturally and realistically depicting the immediacy and intimacy of
place.[^21] By the end of the 19^th^ century, both photographic as well
as aerial technologies were developed, which would lead to their fusion
in the next century.[^22] Edward Casey thus named this era ‘the age of
world picture,’ referring to Heidegger’s theme of the ‘world image’, a
concept which is paraphrased in the title for this book.[^23]

Today, the entire surface of the Earth is continuously photographed from
the air. As Siegfried Kracauer wrote in 1928, ‘This equation is not made
without good reason. For the world itself has taken on a “photographic
face”; it can be photographed because it strives to be absorbed into the
spatial continuum’.[^24] The consequence of such over-photographing is
that today there are no secret or unexplored territories left on Earth.
Satellites used by Google discover some previously hidden part of the
world on the daily basis.[^25] Or, as Virilio writes, ‘There are eyes
everywhere. No blind spot left. What shall we dream when everything
shows visible? We’ll dream of being blind’.[^26]

Yet, even such photography is conditioned by maps and map-making
practices and processes, as I will analyze in Chapter 5. Many maps today
do not prove a direct correlation between physical measures of the land,
instead representing it symbolically. Schematized, they simplify and
reduce the information into what the author of the map, whether an
individual or institution, deems to be the most important, which in turn
leads to maps which are embedded with a priori interpretations. And
moreover, they are adapting to the user, diminishing distinction by
which landscapes used to depict places while maps spaces.

The development of maps has in recent years significantly accelerated in
comparison to the development of landscape during the same
time-period.[^27] But cartography as we have known it no longer exists.
Cartography has become emancipated from the role of the human to become
an autotelic activity. Today, many types of maps are being implemented,
including aggregated, data, geo-, and raster maps, which do not
represent the world as it is experienced, measured, or lived by humans
but some interpretation of information about this world. In other words,
the cartographic reality is no longer directly connected to a single
geographic reality. And there are so many maps online, each tailored to
a specific need, or by a particular investor, leading the viewer to some
product or purpose. We have arrived at an era of overlapping visual
geographic material, due to mapping and photographing services, included
in most mobile gadgets from phones, watches, laptop, to even cars. There
are more maps, and more photographs, of the same place existing. The
same place is found over-represented in many systems at once. Multimodal
images have further distorted our visual conception of reality by
producing multiple and different maps referring to the single
place.[^28]

Susan Sontag once warned, hyper-photographing reality or photographing
it to an excessive or exaggerated, extent, can lead to our complete
detachment from it.[^29] Following Sontag’s line of thinking, we may now
ask ourselves: what is the consequence of our hyper-mapping and
hyper-photographing of reality? Thirty years ago, Henri Lefebvre asked:
how many maps do we need to understand a single place? [^30] As the
number of maps for a single place today grows exponentially, authors as
such as Gunnar Olsson and Tom Conley claim we are living in the age of
the ‘cartographic reason.’[^31] The data-driven characteristics of
contemporary culture demonstrate the pervasiveness of what James Elkins
term the ‘post-medieval mapping gaze,’ whereby people fail to learn how
to see for themselves the infrastructure of the geography around
them.[^32] Other authors note that we are today even fixated on such a
‘cartographic gaze.’[^33] This overabundance of maps leads to general
crisis of representation for the Earth, which in turn produces a
‘cartographic anxiety’, and, ultimately, according to what Flusser
heralded as the ‘end of cartography.’[^34]

## Space and Place 

The crucial difference between the landscape and map, as already noted
by Deleuze and Guattari, is in the positioning of the viewer. With the
landscape, the position of the author is often repeated by the viewer.
But there is no such view that can be repeated with the map. Thus, the
landscape indicates the place of an actual viewer, while the map depicts
the space for many potential viewers. Such concepts are useful because
they demonstrate the role and significance of the social formation
behind our ideas of environment and habitat. Ideas about place, however,
from a sociological perspective, are commonly defined as being immediate
and therefore localized. In contrast, space is always and necessarily
defined as something at once elsewhere and everywhere. From a
sociological perspective, ideas about space and place are informed by
our social unconscious as communicated through the language and images
which frame our cognition.[^35]

The distinction between concepts of space and place in sociology is
commonly attributed to French sociologist Michel de Certeau.[^36] Place
is what there is and physical space is what could be.[^37] Pierre
Bourdieu further elaborated upon this distinction.[^38] And by 1996, he
had reformulated his theory, defining the distinction between the
communal and geographic spaces, attending to a more abstract level of
meaning than with his original materially-based definition.[^39]
Bourdieu’s division departed from the strictly physical definition of
space to the one based on the experience of living (in a society).
Bourdieu, as a sociologist, was focused on ideas of communal space. This
he defined as an interpretation of the real or geographical space,
formulated through the ways in which a certain population captures their
belief systems through perception and production in order to produce a
coherent and consistent meaning of their own habitat.[^40] This
amplified the distinction between communal and physical spaces, where
communal space is based on the immediate experience of some place, and
physical space is based on a variety of possible experiences of the same
place. Yet, through his analysis, Bourdieu pointed out the interaction
between the communal and physical space in general.

Urban sociologist Henri Lefebvre, who succeeded Bourdieu, also
distinguished between space and place, and termed these ‘conceived
space’ and ‘perceived place’ or the ‘represented space’ and the ‘lived
place’ (or maybe even ‘livable’, as a place having a capacity to be
inhabited), providing a direct link between space, place, and their
representation.[^41] Furthermore, Lefebvre distinguished between the
representations of space and representational space or, in terms from my
analysis, the image of the space and the space of the image, which
correspond to the distinction among the conceived versus perceived (or
lived) space.[^42] Lefebvre’s ideas about representational as well as
abstract space would have a considerable influence for visual studies,
and especially the differentiation between two main geographic genres:
landscape and maps. While landscapes show an excerpt of the view of the
author in the space, which is defining the place, maps lays down the
space without placement of the author and have to be used in the
placement of the audience. Still, with new technologies it is the
precise place of the audience which is being mapped in an abstract
space.

## The Frame and the Space

In visual studies, space is a more of an abstract construct,
particularly in discourses about photographic representation, whereas
place is a more of a concrete instance, in terms of the precise
geophysical location of a photographic shoot.

The photographic medium, because it can represent the landscape with
precision, further complicated the space-place distinction. Photography
cannot record anything else but a place, and yet a photograph can refer
to the existence of space. At the conclusion of the photographic
process, an image is realized which is a concrete object. Despite this,
however, the relationship between image and place is not realized
materially but referentially. Thus, the epistemic value of the
photograph, as Jonathan Cohen and Aaron Meskin defined, is derived from
the distinction between the general space of photographer and the
specific place of the photograph, also known as egocentric and
allocentric space.[^43] The distinction between such kinds of spaces is
important in order to understand the truth claim of the photograph. That
is, while it is true that when a viewer looks upon a photograph what
they see is a scene which a photographer has already seen, it does not
represent an actual place, because the egocentric view of the
photographer is already more than the allocentric view in a photograph.

These distinctions can be further applied to analyze the space of the
object (the actual physical space being presented in the image), space
of the author (the original perception of some actual physical
landscape), and space of the viewer (the different real place where the
image is experienced), as I have defined in my previous work.[^44] I
will call these spaces the real, experience, and visual or, in other
terms, the actual, perceived, and represented, so as to define three
different ways in which the Earth has been described. The first level of
space, the real-actual, is independent; the second, the
experiential-perceived, is characterized by its consumption and the
perspectival view; while the third, the visual-represented, has been
located by that view, which it re-experiences. Here, the author has some
information about the real-actual space which they represent, while
audience has some idea about space of the space the author represents,
but also his own place. So, the author of an image ‘sees’ only a section
of the view of the space, which he transfers to the audience. Each of
the subsequent spaces carries elements of the previous one, and they are
being framed by the perspectival view of two places; the one the author
finds inside and the one the audience finds inside.

           **Space**                 **Limit**
  -------- ------------------------- -------------------
  Object   Real / actual             
  Author   Experienced / perceived   Position in space
  Viewer   Visual / represented      Frame of
                                     

[]{#_Toc32170949 .anchor}Table 4: Analysis of three spaces in
photography

In ‘ordinary’ photography, as I will here refer to photographs which are
produced in the course of our everyday activity, the audience sees only
the section of space which was in front of the author. This section of
space is determined by the author’s choice, the type of photographic
lense, as well as exposure settings. This is a small section of some
place, about which the author can know much more than is shown in the
photograph. Thus, contrary to the three types of spaces, there are only
two types of places, because the object and an author or photographer
reside at the same place, which becomes important particularly in remote
photography. While both places, that of the object and that of the
author, are located in the same place, the author’s place is commonly
not visible to the audience, but has to be reconstructed, whether
through perspectival analysis or some other visual methodology.
Therefore, the place of the author is not represented but only
trajectory, defined through the transmission of the characteristics of
the author’s place to the audience’s space. Because of this, an
individual of the audience can produce completely different meanings
based on numerous other factors such as her or his social and political
contexts. If the perspectival analysis or visual method is successful,
the author’s place and audiences’ space may come into alignment.[^45]
But, while the place of the author can only ever be two-dimensional
rather than three-dimensional to the audience. Perspective is
constrained by the fact that the audience cannot put their head into the
picture, as Cohen and Meskin claim, and turn around to see what was
behind the view of the author at the moment of recording. The audience
ends up only being able to vaguely estimate spatial relationships
surrounding the author according to their own personal and subjective
perception.

In contrast to maps, photographs represent a certain place, which is
also made by an author and interpreted by the audience. The place
described in a photograph is not filtered through the technology of the
camera in the same way as a map is filtered through the visual language
and iconic vocabulary of the map-maker. This might be one reason that
photography has since its earliest days been transformed in order to
become more like maps, the development of which I will analyze in
Chapter 5.

William Cartwright and his coauthors valorize the distinction between
the space presented in a map and the place depicted in a
photograph.[^46] He claims that the location of the user of a map still
does not produce a located space, because dot produced on the crossroad
of the orthogonal lines is not a territory, as dot is basically
single-dimensional.[^47] This difference between a specific place and a
general space becomes even clearer when dealing with the non-places
which emerge with post-digital photography in the age of total images.

Such non-places, consumed through strategies of over-mapping such as
Google Earth, lack the signature and specificity necessary to be
determined as particular places.

## Media Spaces

With new media, especially the rise of the digital media, these theories
about space and place can appear over-simplistic, as Doreen Massey has
already noted, because place is constructed through an understanding of
space.[^48] Indeed, the dualism between place and space turns out to be
quite limiting. The complexity of the space in post-digital photography
emerges, in principle, from a divide between the space as it is
represented and the place which has in some way been broadcast or
transmitted into this space. Such a simultaneity, with its vague origin,
trajectory, and destination, leads not only to a ‘middle’ space
negotiated by the audience or user, but also to a proliferation of
multiple spaces. It is therefore crucial to revise our definitions of
space and place, through the analysis of the complex, assembled spaces
which today are nevertheless generated from actual recordings of
specific places.[^49]

For our definition of virtual space, Henri Lefebvre’s definition of
abstract space is important as is the manner in which abstract spaces is
produced in relation to real space. This includes the historic,
military, urban, and economic narratives within these spaces which in
turn can make abstract spaces more complex and thus, at least to a
limited extent, more real.[^50] Supported by Lefebvre’s distinctions
between the conceived and the perceived, the represented and the lived,
contemporary media epistemology suggests that we do perceive virtual
space as if it is real. And we do not disregard the knowledge that it is
being transmitted. Rather, we live in both virtual and real space
simultaneously.[^51] Thus, W.J.T. Mitchell distinguished between the
virtual space that is transferred by a media and the unmediated
‘feeling’ of a place in reality.[^52] That is to say space is
epistemological while place is phenomenological, space is conceived
while place is perceived. Yet, today space that is constructed around
place, or digital space, is perceived as being integral to our life
experience as well.

Aside from the precise placement of the viewer onto the map, there is
yet another distinction of the new images – the question of the author
which is now not placed into own, separate place, but can reside also in
the audience space, which now co-creates the map by its use. Besides,
the creator can also be nonhuman. Such is the total image made using
artificial intelligence. Artificial intelligence is conditioned by
biology, perception, or society the way human intelligence. And
artificial intelligence does not interpret photographs from within the
framework of the ‘human photographic condition’, as I have defined it in
the Introduction. That is, the computation of these machines is not
based on the distance from the scene, view angle, or individual frame
which determines how the photographic medium is necessarily subjective.
Moreover, place as such does not exist to artificial intelligence
because any the concept of dimensionality would not be related to a
physical place but rather to an overlay of space as an objective or
pseudo-objective category. Therefore, to an artificial intelligence, all
places are seen at once in so far as many places are computed or
aggregated together.

[^1]: Although, as Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari noted: ‘Have we
    not, however, reverted to a simple dualism by contrasting maps to
    tracings, as good and bad sides?’ Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari,
    *Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia,* trans. Brian
    Massumi, Minnesota and London: Minnesota University Press, 1987, 13.

[^2]: The science of geography was initiated in Antiquity, such as in
    the works of Ptolemy and Strabo. Historians describe Ptolemy as the
    founder of map-making and cartography, while Strabo as the father of
    the landscape.

[^3]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77690_3983396227 .anchor} Deleuze and
    Guattari, *Thousand Plateaus,* 2.

[^4]: Tom Conley, *Cartographic Cinema*, Minneapolis: University of
    Minnesota Press, 2007.

[^5]: This drawing, still, according to some presents merely a realistic
    drawing of the animal’s spots, rather than a sophisticated abstract
    map.

[^6]: Denis Wood, with John Fels and John Krygier, *Rethinking the Power
    of Maps,* New York: The Guilford Press, 2010.

[^7]: Wood, Fels, and Krygier, *Rethinking the Power of Maps. *

[^8]: Similarly, the first settlers’ maps, according to Moore and
    Drecki, left unvisited areas blank. See: Antoni Moore and Igor
    Drecki (eds) *Geospatial visualization,* Berlin: Springer, 2013.

[^9]: As the author is already mentioned Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa.

[^10]: Greek cartographers, as Anaximander (c. 610-546 BCE), Hecatus of
    Miletus (c. 550-476 BCE) in his *Ges Periodos* already used the
    circular representation of the known world, ecumene, while
    Erastosthenes (c. 276-194 BCE) used the system of parallels and
    meridians. In works by Posidonius (c. 150-130 BCE) there is a
    measure of circumference of the Earth, which was latter corrected in
    Strabo’s (64 BC-24 CE) *Geographica.* Pomponius Mela went out of
    ecumene, anticipating the existence of the world outside of it to be
    discovered. Marinus of Tyre (c. 120 CE) invented equi-rectangular
    projection, allowing contemporary cartography. He also gave a shape
    of this world by referring to China and Fortunate islands. Ptolemy
    (c. 150) in his *Geography* used Marinus’ system, calculating
    absolute distances.

[^11]: Most of the maps from the Classical and Medieval periods, such as
    the Ptolomaic as Peutinger maps, with all earlier editions and
    versions lost to time, exist today only as some post-Medieval
    variant.

[^12]: Konrad Peutinger was a German antiquarian who kept the map
    originally discovered by Conrad Celtes. Peutinger family has kept
    the map for hundreds a years until selling it to Prince of Savoy in
    1714 who bought it for the public library in Vienna.

[^13]: For further details, see: Benet Salway, ‘The Nature and Genesis
    of the Peutinger Map’, *Imago Mundi* 57.2 (2005): 119-135.

[^14]: Another itinerary map from this era is the *Itinerarium
    Antonini,* which lists places and distances.

[^15]: If we compare this map to a recent project of mapping by Space
    Humanities on Stanford, giving us possibility to understand the
    travel in Roman era, a difference of time-map and map on time (in
    real space) comes obvious. Namely while time distort the Peutinger’s
    map, the map of the Stanford project is the precise one provided by
    geometry, only being furnished with historical data. Still, while we
    can imagine travelling on Peutinger’s map, it is more likely we will
    understand and learn objectively what it was during the Antiquity
    with Stanford map.

[^16]: Andrew Pettegree, *The Book in the Renaissance*, New Haven: Yale
    University Press, 2011.

[^17]: Bruno Latour, *Down to Earth: Politics in the New Climatic
    Regime*, Cambridge: Polity Press, 2018, 78.

[^18]: Paul Virilio and Sylvere Lotringer, *Crepuscular Dawn*, Los
    Angeles and New York: Semiotext(e) and MIT Press, 2002, 53

[^19]: Gombrich analyses how even in the 16^th^ century, the landscape
    it preserved the features of innovation in technology. See: Ernst
    Gombrich, *Norm and Form:* *Studies in the Art of the Renaissance*,
    *Volume I: Norm and Form*, London: Phaidon Press, 1994.

[^20]: Edward Casey, ‘Between Geography and Philosophy: What Does It
    Mean to Be in the World?’, *Annals of the Association of American
    Geographers* 91.4 (2001): 683-693.

[^21]: Denis Cosgrove, *Social Formation and Symbolic Landscape*,
    Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press, 1984.

[^22]: Cosgrove, *Social Formation*.

[^23]: Casey, ‘Between Geography and Philosophy’.

[^24]: Kracauer, *The Mass Ornament*, 59.

[^25]: Because of Google introducing Google Earth Engine, a cloud-based,
    planetary-scale computing platform for environmental and geospatial
    analysis, many countries have complained about the military secrets
    being accidentally revealed. Through the satellite images on Google
    Earth, everyday people have even seen places such as detention
    centers for refugees and asylum seekers, classified airports, and
    sentries training at secret military compounds. See for example:
    ‘Google Maps Update Accidently Reveals Secret Military Sites’,
    *ZDnet*,
    https://www.zdnet.com/article/google-maps-update-accidentally-reveals-secret-military-sites/;
    ‘Taiwans Darkest Military Secrets Revealed Google Maps’, *SCMP*,
    https://www.scmp.com/news/china/military/article/2186351/taiwans-darkest-military-secrets-revealed-google-maps?li\_source=LI&li\_medium=section-top-picks-for-you.

[^26]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77446_3983396227 .anchor} Louise Wilson,
    ‘Interview with Paul Virilio: Cyberwar, God and Television’,
    http://ctheory.net/ctheory\_wp/cyberwar-god-and-television-interview-with-paul-virilio/.

[^27]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77692_3983396227 .anchor} McKenzie Wark,
    *Virtual Geography: Living with Global Media Events,* Indiana
    University Press, 1994. Thus, Buci-Glucksmann thus invites for a
    formation of yet another gaze, that would be in capacity to bridge
    the great divide of real and virtual, the '’meta-gaze’, ‘which bears
    the modalities of the exercise of its execution and exhibits its
    syntax’. Buci-Glucksmann, ‘Icarus Today’, 61.

[^28]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77620_3983396227 .anchor} Cartwright,
    *Multimedia Cartography. *

[^29]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77676_3983396227 .anchor} Sontag, *On
    Photography.*

[^30]: ‘How many maps, in the descriptive or geographical sense, might
    be needed to deal exhaustively with a given space, to code and
    decode all its meanings and contents? It is doubtful whether a
    finite number can ever be given to this sort of question. \[…\] We
    are confronted not by one social space but by many indeed, by an
    unlimited multiplicity or unaccountable set of social spaces.’
    Lefebvre, *The* *production of spaces*, 85.

[^31]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77626_3983396227 .anchor} Gunnar Olsson,
    *Abysmal: A Critique of Cartographic Reason*, Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press, 2007; Tom Conley, *Cartographic Cinema*, Minneapolis:
    University of Minnesota Press, 2007.

[^32]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77624_3983396227 .anchor} Elkins, *The
    Poetics of Perspective*, 135.

[^33]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77622_3983396227 .anchor}
    Christine.Buci-Glucksmann**,** *L'oeil cartographique de l'art,*
    Paris: Gallilee, 1996**.**

[^34]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77618_3983396227 .anchor} Vilém Flusser,
    ‘Das Verschwinden der Ferne’, *Arch plus* 111 (1992): 31–32.

[^35]: In other words, place belongs to the domain of epistemology, of
    the immediate experience, while space belongs to the domain of
    ontology, as the possibility of even the most unspecific existence.
    Simultaneously, the idea of space is necessarily connected to ideas
    on the level of metaphysics, such as religion or ideology.
    Consequently, place has been dealt with mostly in terms of sociology
    and psychology, while space was a subject of the disciplines given
    the highest place in Plato’s hierarchy of knowledge; mathematics,
    architecture, poetry, but also politics. Sociology is a discipline
    which compares and bridges the space and place.

[^36]: Michel de Certeau, Luce Giard, and Pierre Mayol, *The Practice of
    Everyday Life*, *Volume 2: Living and Cooking*, trans. Timothy J.
    Tomasik, Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1998,
    117-118.

[^37]: De Certeau et al, *The Practice of Everyday Life*.

[^38]: See: Pierre Bourdieu, ‘Social Space and Symbolic Power’,
    *Sociological Theory* 7.1 (1989): 14-25.

[^39]: Pierre Bourdieu, ‘Physical Space, Social Space and Habitus’,
    *Rapport* 10, Institutt for sosiologi og samfunnsgeografi
    Universitetet i Oslo, Oslo, 1996. 

[^40]: Although society has changed since Bourdieu’s writing, especially
    regarding non-national colonization inside Western communities, I
    will continue to use his theory of consummation of space as directly
    connected to terms I use concept of gentrification. This, in terms
    of the previously, given example meant – replacement of the old
    population with a new one.

[^41]: Henri Lefebvre, *The Production of Space*, trans. Donald
    Nicholson, Smith, Oxford: Blackwell Publishing 1991.

[^42]: Lefebvre, *The Production of Space*.

[^43]: Jonathan Cohen and Aaron Meskin, ‘On Epistemic value of
    Photographs’, *Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism* 62.2 (2014):
    197-210.

[^44]: Peraica, *Fotografija kao dokaz*.

[^45]: Sometimes the two gazes can overlap, as the author’s and viewers’
    gaze, still, as mentioned in analysis of the Medieval images. And in
    some cases viewer’s view can be situated from the inside of the
    image space, thus having only a section of the author’s space.

[^46]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77610_3983396227 .anchor} William
    Cartwright, Michael P. Peterson, and Georg Gartner, *Multimedia
    Cartography*, Heidelberg: Springer, 1999.

[^47]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77608_3983396227 .anchor} Cartwright,
    Peterson and Gartner, *Multimedia Cartography*.

[^48]: Doreen Massey, John Allen, and Phil Sarre, *Human Geography
    Today*, Cambridge: Polity, 1991.

[^49]: Christopher Tilley has mapped even more spaces, according the way
    they are experienced: somatic space, perceptual space, existential
    space (as social), architectural space, and cognitive space, for
    example. Tilley, Christopher Tilley, *A Phenomenology of the
    Landscape: Places, Paths and Monuments, Explorations in
    Anthropology*, London: Berg Publishers, London, 1997. And Michael
    Dear defined how ‘the entire panoply of place-based contingencies
    involved in photographic production \[…\] incorporates; \[…\] - The
    place of production, which incorporates both the specific site of
    photography \[…\]; - The production of place, including the
    narrative and compositional aspects of the image, as well as the
    spatial techniques employed by the image-maker \[…\]; - The place of
    presentation, referring to the image and its mode of presentation
    \[…\]; and \[…\] - Reception in place, what happens to the image
    when it is released to the world of consumption’. Michael Dear,
    ‘Creativity and Place’, in Michael Dear, Jim Ketchum, Sarah Luria,
    and Doug Richardson (eds) *GeoHumanities: Art, History, Text at the
    Edge of Place*, London and New York: Routledge, 2011, 11.

[^50]: A class struggle, Lefebvre noted, can exist within an image,
    representing space, in the way of its basic coding by the author as
    well as in the communal practice of reading. Lefebvre, *The
    Production of Space*, 210.

[^51]: This obscuring of the line between the real and virtual has come
    the most visible in post-humanism, in which digital space has been
    recognized and acknowledged as reality, as it is been experienced as
    one.

[^52]: Mitchell, *Landscape and Power*.
