---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Chapter 5: Datafied Landscapes and Located Maps 

## Maps and Photographs

The difference between the up-in-the-air photograph and the map is not
as great as the difference between the map and the down-to-the-ground
landscape. Indeed, aerial photography and map making have much more in
common. Both genres of image depict the world without visibly having
either a particular subject’s view angle or even a general human view
angle. Given the similarity between aerial photographs and maps, some
authors, such as Anthony Vidler, claim that both image genres have their
foundation in the representation of the human view from above.[^1]
Aerial photography, because it is free from the constraints of human
existence on the surface of the Earth and perspective systems which are
relative to this way of being, provides a big picture which functions
topographically while appearing cartographical. And Christine
Buci-Glucksmann also defined such an ‘Icaro-cartographic’ view by
asking: ‘Does the cartographic eye of the earth already reveal to us a
truth that the Icarian eye of a technologically programmed world would
conceal from us?’[^2] An ‘Apollonian perspective is implicit in
Ptolemaic cartography’s positioning of the observer at sufficient
distance to see the spherical Earth’, wrote Denis Cosgrove.[^3] The
media evolution of an image genre in which aerial photography and map
making are combined was so rapid and intense that Fred Moffit named it
an era of ‘aero-photographic mapping’.[^4] In this chapter, however, I
will show how the small differences between aerial photographs and maps
changed with their dataification.

Yet, at the very beginning of the implementation of aerial photography,
map making and photography were still being treated as distinct
practices. For instance, the map and photograph were used not only to
represent space bellow, but also for mutual testing how space was being
represented. During the First World War, the aerial view or bird’s eye
view was still a novel experience. Only a very few soldiers, being also
aviators, ever actually went into the wild blue yonder and climbed high
into the sun. And most of these soldiers were not yet accustomed to the
view. They required additional support for their own eyes, in terms of
some proof for the correlation between the location on the map and the
location which they saw while they were flying. For this reason, so as
to double check the reality of their own perception, some pilots
sketched maps on the palms of their hands. Soon after WWI, aerial
photography began to be combined with map making independent of human
verification that the map and the photograph in fact reference the same
information.[^5] The principle motivation for combining these image
genres, at least in the armed forces, was not only to control the space
represented, but also to correct this data through the reciprocal
testing of each form’s accuracy. And across the 20^th^ century, with the
acceleration in their use by the military, these two image types have
become increasingly merged.[^6]

After a time of acclimatization to an aerial view which combined ways of
seeing from both photograph and map, further similarity between two
image genres become clear. When comparing aerial photography to ordinary
photography, the photographer has fewer choices for how they do the
recording, such as less possible view angles, and even more objects on
which to focus. By reducing the range and variety of subjective
aesthetic choices in how the photographer can represent the landscape,
aerial photography shifts from an aesthetic framework to a practical and
utilitarian purpose.

Even so, there are differences between aerial photographs and maps. When
comparing aerial photographs to map making, for example, there are no
scales in aerial photography which provide a ratio between the distance
in the image and the distance on the ground. This makes spatial
distortions in the image less clear at a first glance because they have
no metric parameter. And such distortions produce ‘noise’ in our
interpretation of our own habitat. At least, this was a problem until
the image genre became digitized, and aerial photographs could
incorporate the kind of measurement systems that have long been included
with maps. While in the early 20^th^ century aerial photographs may have
looked like maps but did not function like maps, since the 1950s with
the digital turn, the possibility of full integration between aerial
photography and map making became possible.

## Datafication of Geography

The first experiments with imaging techniques which would lead to
digital map making were already being undertaken after WWII. Yet it took
many years for these techniques to become fully functional. And the
mid-20^th^ century wave of simultaneous digitization and datafication
had a strong influence on our image of the world, regarding both
photographs as well as maps, profoundly changing these image genres and,
ultimately, even connecting them.

The first pre-digital experiment with mapping was undertaken in the
project *The Streets of London* (1944) by the British company Nextbase.
The *Glasgow Online Digital Atlas* soon followed. The first digital map
was in ASCII format, with its code representing English characters as
numbers, with each letter. Assigned a number from 0 to 127 in a
reductive schema.[^7] However, it took many years for interactive maps
to be developed. In 1978 the *Aspen Movie Map* project by MIT introduced
the streets of the city of Aspen to the audience using photographs. With
CD technology, the *Digital Chart of the World* (DCW), a comprehensive
digital map of the Earth based on the United States Defense Mapping
Agency’s (DMA) operational navigation chart, was developed. Still, the
first years of implementation of digital maps were dedicated to the
digitization of analogue media through a process of scanning, as in the
*World Factbook* by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). Desktop and
web publishing led to further developments for the map. Although only
with Web 2.0, which emphasized user-generated content, ease of use, a
participatory culture, and interoperability for end users, did digital
cartography begin to develop. And today there are plenty of new
techniques for mapping, from as augmented vision to
tele-cartography.[^8] Beyond such techniques, there are cartographic
games, like the *Magellan* board and video games. The digitization of
maps, along with satellite photography, has also been integrated into
projects such as Google Earth, Google Maps, and Google Street View,
which are accessible through mobile devices .[^9] These projects,
launched since 2001, 2005, and 2007, respectively, support users as they
explore the Earth with comparatively realistic images which combine maps
and photographs.

## GiS 

Another key invention for contemporary digital geography is the
Geographic Information System (GIS), a computer system designed to
capture, store, analyze, and present data related to spatial or
geographic data about positions of various entities or objects on the
Earth’s surface. Utilizing systems like GIS in their analyses, the field
of Geographic Information Science (GiScience or GiS) was established on
the methodological and theoretical grounds of psychogeographic
strategies for exploring urban environments. Historically, the field
emerged from the Situationist International (SI) organization of social
revolutionaries, prominent in Europe from 1957 to 1972, and made up of
avant-garde artists as well as intellectual and political theorists.
Already in the mid-20^th^ century, in their work, aerial photography and
maps were being fused together, as for example by Guy-Ernest Debord in
his *Introduction to a Critique of Urban Geography* (1955) which, as
Anthony Vidler notes, preserved the fundamental roles of both maps and
photographs in the combined works, as with his collaged map of Paris
(1956).[^10] William Bunge in *Fitzgerald: Geography of a Revolution*
(1971); as well as the Experiments in Art and Technology (E.A.T.)
Datascape (1966-1970), an exploratory tool for humanities scholars in
social history for exploring the intersection between art and non-art
contexts followed.[^11] And by the 1990s, GIS technology had evolved
into a practical software.[^12] Beyond applied GiScience, art-based
researchers have also developed a number of experimental methods, such
as the tactical cartography of the Paris-based conceptual art group
Bureau D’études, or Mapping Contemporary Capitalism (MoC) by the editors
of *Mute Magazine*, among others.[^13] The psychogeographies of the
mid-20^th^ century included ‘attempts to record and represent the grain
and patina of place through juxtapositions and interpretations of the
historical and the contemporary, the political and poetic, the
discursive and sensual’[^14]

In the GiScience of today, in addition to quantitative projects, there
are also qualitative projects. These projects are used to present a
critical geography in which new methods are applied to mapping services
which might, for example, provide a better life quality. There are also
feminist and queer geographic information systems.[^15] The FOAM Map,
for example, allows the exploration of various community-verified
registries of crowdsourced places.[^16] The ‘network image’, as Virilio
them, today has a capacity to convey various rich information.[^17] To
describe such maps, which are made not only from spatial but other kinds
of information, the term ‘deep map’ is commonly used.[^18] The
pioneering *Spatial History Project* at the Center for Spatial and
Textual Analysis (CESTA) at Stanford University, for example, supports
the development of such deep maps. In one of their projects, researchers
use GIS technology to create a layered history of Rome, updating the
cartographic masterpiece of ancient Roman topography, the *Forma Urbis
Romae*, published in 1901 by archaeologist Rodolfo Lanciani. While the
13^th^ century *Tabula Peutingeriana*, described previously, showed how
many post-Roman cultures imagined the Roman Empire at one point in time,
the 21^st^ century *Forma Urbis Romae* shows how the city of Rome
changed over time from the retrospective vantage point of today.[^19]
The outcome of such works from Stanford’s *Spatial History Project* have
not only informed the fields of visual studies and visual history, but
improved how space is being visualized, leading to new kinds of
interaction.[^20] Other such projects which implement a critical
geography include artistic projects like GPS Art by Michael Wallace, who
drives around on his bike as it is tracked with GPS in order to outline
various figures on a map, or the *Tangible Disaster Information System*
developed by the Tangible Media Group at MIT, a collaborative tool. For
planning disaster measures based on simulations using GIS.[^21] And
there are those which are based on crowd sourcing and social networks.
Such artistic experiments show that control is not the only possible
outcome for digital mapping, but that new tools can also be developed
for the betterment of society.

## Space and GIS

GIS has introduced large change in the way we orientate by using maps,
so for example the navigation feature for Google Maps employs the reader
of the map no longer has to navigate wander on the map, in the search of
the place. Maps have long been thought of as objective, in large part
because they are made in a Cartesian space and with location
descriptors. But an element of subjectivity was still involved, because
such maps were used by viewers who were engaged in ‘reading’ them, and
who located themselves in relation to both the map and the world. Today,
however, place is represented not by a coordinate system but rather the
system’s coordinates, which automatically position the viewer in
relation to the data.[^22] This re-introduction of the specific into the
genre of the map is not only because Google Maps and other mapping
systems turn our spaces of imagination into a concrete, unique, and
physically precise place.

As a consequence of the Geographic Information System, at least
according to Alberto Toscano and Jeff Kinkle, local placement has become
privileged over general picture in the post-digital era.[^23] When using
such geoprocessing, such as with the free-to-use and easily accessible
proprietary web application Google Maps, the user becomes caught up in a
passive logic within a system that self-organizes around them while
allowing only a portion of the Earth to be visible. We use devices to
locate ourselves in maps and photographs which are taken not from a
human perspective down on Earth but from an eye-in-the-sky perspective
up in the air. In so doing, however, they deprive us from the process of
placing ourselves in the larger geographic area, which we would need in
order to understand the geographic specification, as we are being placed
by the system, not our own action of the navigation.

While conveying a great deal of information, becoming total, all
information are situated and particular around placement of the user
loosing insight into a total image. Geo-positioning triangulation,
aerial photography, and images of outer space have all lead to a
cartography which is far from the ground, producing total images, while
simultaneously tracking the user.[^24] Contemporary geographic imaging
and representing technologies, contrary to drawings on palms of pilots,
may pinpoint our location in a map, by the use of the global navigation
satellite system (GNSS), global positioning system (GPS), and geographic
information systems (GIS) which together provide geolocation and time
information to a receiver anywhere on or near the Earth.

[[[]{#_Toc32255885 .anchor}]{#_Toc31046558 .anchor}]{#_Toc28
.anchor}Figure 21: GPS information in photography (screenshot)

[[[]{#_Toc32255886 .anchor}]{#_Toc31046557 .anchor}]{#_Toc27
.anchor}Figure 22: Hyperimage with place tags (screenshot)

## Tagging Landscapes

With each new technological means for geographic abstraction, the ways
in which we represent space and place changes substantially, as new
roles are assigned to the landscape and its parts which serve not to
depict but to classify. New modes of visual representation, when applied
in map and landscape making, have changed how we understand our habitat
as well. These days, landscapes are highly coded with linguistic and
symbolic information. Geographic information systems, designed to
capture, store, manipulate, analyze, manage, and present spatial and
geographic data, also allow users to create interactive queries to
analyze spatial information, edit data in maps, and present the results
of these operations, adding non-geographical data to place.[^25]

Since of now, turning them into complex image-text collages. Name-tags
are attached to photographs, making them complex collages. Such place
names or toponyms, according Matthew Johnson, ‘continue to be an
invaluable source of information, particularly in the topographical
information they provide,’ as it is possible to reconstruct ideas,
narratives, purposes and values a society that made a certain map, out
of the toponymic names on the map.[^26] Mapping over a photograph is
often even accompanied by crowdsourced data tagging, with crowd tagging
and over-tagging. Using the navigation feature in the Google Maps
application, a user of the map now moves through a dynamic system of
explanation, rather than simply wandering the streets of a city or the
hills of a wood in search of a place. These practices of naming and
renaming are interesting because they indicate the specific meanings
which become attached to the places on a map.[^27] Crowd-sourced
name-places are also available as GIS tools on platforms.[^28] A number
of users can crowd-name the same location producing a cacophony. So, for
the artwork *The City Formerly Known as Cambridge* (2008), the artist
Catherine d’Ignazio (known as kanarinka) held a series of thirteen
events in which she invited members of the public to rename the public
spaces in the city of Cambridge, Massachusetts, collecting over 300 new
names for crowd-sourced maps.[^29]

## Neither Maps nor Photographs 

The post-digital age has lead to more interactive maps, bringing with it
different kinds of interactivity and user-orientation, such as the
browseability of fixed maps (while at the same it is possible for users
to navigate aerial or street-view photographs as well). In the
post-digital era, thus, map and landscape are merged as data are
introduced into another map. Moreover, different types of maps are
merged with the landscape, which carry not only information on place and
space, but also spatially organized information, as geo-positioning and
geolocation which effectively maps the user.[^30] By merging landscapes
and maps, precise places with spaces, and direct visions with
visualizations, all previously strictly divided spatial descriptions are
merged, and in a way – confused. Qualities of two previously separate
genres fuse, and in a way mutually contaminate.

Fusing together this enormous amount of data, some of which are also
maps, the medium as photography loses its vagueness, by which something
that necessary exists is not the place we necessary recognize. Being
precise and deictic, photographs are obliged to represent and lose the
artistic vagueness characteristic for the medium. Among such data,
geo-mapped photographs play a large deal, as they are simultaneously
while used for mapping the road, used for targeting and evading the
privacy. Today, most photographically based images are automatically
encoded with location data. Maps situate photography in place which can
be tracked and found. Today most of the cameras automatically precise
the place via GPS, while GIS mapping can be introduced to mobile phones,
already traced by satellites. Once set on the network such images
directly produce data that can be used in order to engage many actions,
even the complicated ones of satellite tracing.[^31] Such new total
images connect the devices to the internet, even acquiring an Internet
Protocol (IP) address, and with direct implementation of GPS and GIS
technologies, superimpose traceability of to ordinary human visual
control.

Along with GPS features, both photographs and maps are incorporated into
new location and tracking devices. With GIS technology maps are not
general anymore, but user-orientated and situated, while with GIS and
GPS data in photographs, we are precisely placed in space. Visualization
of maps destroyed the original vision of evidence in photograph. At the
same time maps started mapping users, not the territory. Simultaneously,
with implementation of new location technologies maps become localized,
losing their stabile general purpose, as being organized around dynamic
directions, itineraries, or routes, which refer to only a section of the
map. It is the map that mocks the viewer showing something that can
never be seen. To the other hand, introducing location technologies into
images produces a new sense of the targeting. What changes in particular
with maps, is - their visuality and it is two parallel tendencies that
mark the development: the de-visualization of maps, as tools of
visualization by their change into systems that self-organizes around
the act of use, rather than being visually constantly present and
absorption of photographs into yet one of the layers of maps. A map is
not only sequenced and de-visualized in its peculiar abstract sense.
While map becomes a hypermap, containing many strata of information as
layers, landscape produces a place into a hyper-place, merging various
visual information.

Still, by merging with maps, photographs which were standing for
particular yet usually not necessarily known places to the audience
become very precise, geo-mapped places. Now, with the merge between
photograph and map, these hybrid forms teeter between realism and
abstraction. They are again, as Peutinger’s map,
neither-map-nor-landscape, and thus also; neither real-nor abstract.
Yet, the problem of mixture is not in its vagueness, but for forms that
cannot be easily defined.

Strict division between map and landscape, which has existed for over
two thousand years, has all but vanished under these new geographies.
Yet, despite the introduction of aerial photography and digital maps,
bringing once split reality closer, especially by dataification, the
divide between the map and landscape persist. With Google Earth Engine,
for example, the divide between the map and landscape is still profound
and applied to different projects, Google Maps and Google Earth,
respectively.[^32] While allows the viewer to sliding aside the
orthogonal view for about five degrees, which maintains maintaining
fixed shadows, allowing travel through streets, and 360-degree view,
Google Maps combines flattened abstract street organization with Google
Earth satellite image, as well as photographs uploaded by the user
community. While these image genres have been partially integrated with
new techniques for visually representing the world we live in, this has
changed the way we use maps and landscapes as well.[^33] To have a view
that is cartographic and realistic the user must change layers or switch
the platform in toto.

## Double Coding

Bringing formally together far and close, map and landscape, space and
place, contemporary technologies are diminishing clarity of binaries,
often organizing human systems of thought. Thus, simultaneously as
diminishing differences in the geographical binary, the new amalgamation
leads to the same effect in visual and socio-political ones. A double
coding occurs in new genres of images which are neither maps nor
landscapes but a kind of coded text. This double coding may be analyzed
using nine parameters set forth by Katherine Hayles for describing the
differences between printed and coded texts.[^34] First, coded texts are
dynamic images. Second, they include both analogue and digital coding.
And thus coded texts simultaneously include coded as well as natural
languages. Consequently, third, they are not fixed, but mutable and
transformable. Thus, fourth, they are generated through the
fragmentation and recombination. Fifth, coded texts operate in three
dimensions. And therefore, sixth, they are spaces to navigate. Seventh,
they are written and are read in distributed cognitive environments and
can be read only by cyborgs. Eight, ‘with digital texts, the
fragmentation is deeper, more pervasive, and more extreme than with the
alphanumeric character of print’.[^35] And, in such a way, ninth, this
information can be easier to manipulate. This shift between the printed
and coded texts can also be applied to visual material, for instance, to
the landscape and a map, but also to all of their potential layers of
digitalization, such as analogue or digital maps as well as analogue or
digital photographic landscapes.

Digital maps, which are more complex than analogue printed maps because
they contain more information, in so far as the information which they
contain is interactive and transforms according to the needs of the
user, are also doubly coded: once by the computer and once by the user.
Because of this double coding, and the consequent transformability of
the map, the map can be manipulated. And the interpretation of digital
maps becomes particularly tricky when photographic materials are
employed in their production, given the epistemic power of such
photographs. Although analogue photographs are not originally coded in
the same way that digital photographs are, neither consists of the same
kinds of discreet elements that both the language alphabet and
cartographic symbols do, Hayles calls iconographic as bearing
‘morphological resemblance to its referent’, once fragmented, can be
employed as a material in various manipulations too.[^36] Likewise maps,
in contrast to analogue photography, digital photography is discreet,
consisting of equal basic elements, which are then computable. The pixel
is the simplest metrical element. Because of this, large constellations
of pixel structures may be more easily traced by photogrammetric
software merging images. The merging of complex data does not just merge
photographs and maps, but at certain stages in the process fuses them,
using these as building material for a precise three-dimensional
reality. Ultimately, of course, such digital photographs may still be
printed on paper, as has been done with analogue photographs for nearly
two centuries now. But having been reworked and distorted, even these
photographs fail to provide a direct and undisturbed relation to the
reality.

Manipulations Hayles mentions for texts also are applicable to
photographs, as for example in photomontage. Photo montaged images are
traceable in the analogue world, but less visible in the digital one.
The initial coding of the photography has been set by aerial images,
which tended to simulate a mapping view. Moreover, once merged with
maps, photographs are not only as digital, but also as maps, becoming
more complex systems. Such a double coding happens in all the cases
where photographs are merged with maps, as in hypermaps, photomaps,
orthophotos, and mapped photographs, I will analyze in the next chapter.

Post-digital aerial and satellite photography is not exclusively a
photographic medium. Here, the photograph is but one layer of many. Or
it is merely a visual style for the image. Whether part of the hypermap,
orthomap, or photomap, the photograph is given a secondary role and
value. It has lost its representative function. It has become a coded
system. Even so, however, in comparison the visualizations of large
datasets, photography fails to be authentically ‘deep’ in terms of an
amount of information carried by it (if deep is to be taken as the
authentic criteria of this age, as in deep space). Or, its ‘depth’ may
consist of a mere resolution enlargement (such is the one in high
resolution photography). These images display an enormous amount of
information, as well as offering both close and distant views and far
breaking the barrier of the human vision. Besides, they are breaking the
boundary of the human photography as offering the near and far, which
was previously dividing the tele and macro photography.[^37]

[^1]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77700_3983396227 .anchor} Anthony Vidler,
    ‘Terres Inconnues: Cartographies of a landscape to be invented’,
    *October* 115 (Winter 2006): 13-30.

[^2]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77702_3983396227 .anchor} Buci-Glucksmann,
    ‘Icarus Today’, 60.

[^3]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77698_3983396227 .anchor} Cosgrove,
    ‘Contested Global Visions’, 271.

[^4]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77704_3983396227 .anchor} Fred H. Moffit, ‘A
    Method of Aerophotographic Mapping’, *Geographical Review* 10
    (November 1920): 326-338.

[^5]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77706_3983396227 .anchor} There can be
    different types of maps of the same battlefield in war, produced by
    different armies; field sketch, blank topographic map, trench maps,
    intelligence map, practical artillery positioning map, strategic
    map, each being used by different military order.

[^6]: Siegfried Kracauer, ‘Photography’, *Critical Inquiry (*Spring
    1993): 433.

[^7]: See: Cartwright, Peterson, and Gartner, *Multimedia Cartography*.

[^8]: See: Cartwright, Peterson, and Gartner, *Multimedia Cartography*.

[^9]: Denis Cosgrove, *Geography and Vision: Seeing, Imagining and
    Representing the World*, London: I. B. Tauris, 2008; Cosgrove,
    *Apollo’s Eye*; W.J.T. Mitchell, *Landscape and Power*, Chicago:
    University of Chicago Press, 2002.

[^10]: See: Anthony Vidler, ‘Terres Inconnues’, *October* 115.1 (2006):
    13-30.

[^11]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77688_3983396227 .anchor} This included
    artworks by Andy Warhol, Nam June Paik, Robert Breer, Merce
    Cunningham, John Cage, Robert Rauschenberg, and Robert Whitman,
    among others.

[^12]: For example such software is: ESRI’s ArcGIS, CARTO, mapbok.

[^13]: For an overview, see: Michael F. Goodchild, ‘Twenty years of
    progress: GIScience in 2010’, *Journal of Spatial Information
    Science* 1 (2010): 10.5311/JOSIS.2010.1.2

[^14]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77684_3983396227 .anchor} Mike Pearson and
    Michael Shanks, *Theatre/Archaeology*, London: Routledge, 2001,
    64-65.

[^15]: See: Matthew H. Wilson, *New Lines: Critical GIS and the Trouble
    of the Map,* Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2017.

[^16]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77682_3983396227 .anchor} ‘Foam Map’,
    https://www.foam.space/map.

[^17]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77666_3983396227 .anchor} ‘Technical images
    arise in an attempt to consolidate particular around us and in our
    consciousness’, writes Flusser in *Into the universe of technical
    images,* 16. Adding that the role of such images is to grasp the
    ungraspable, visualize the invisible, among others. ‘People no
    longer group themselves according to problems, but around technical
    images’, he wrote. Flusser *Into the Universe of Technical Images*,
    5.

[^18]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77654_3983396227 .anchor} Trevor Harris
    gives a number of criteria for deep maps, they should be; ‘1. Large
    to contain all data, 2. Should be slow, 3. Sumptuous, or
    multilayered, 4. Multimedia, 5. Should contain graphic, time-based
    and database media/systems, 6. Require engagement of insiders and
    outsiders, 7. Bring together amateur and professional, artist and
    scientist 8. Are possible by digital, 9. Will not seek authority and
    objectivity as ordinary cartography, but will be negotiated, 10.
    Will be unstable’. David J Bodenhamer, John Corrigan and Trevor M
    Harris, *Deep Maps and Spatial Narratives*, Bloomington and
    Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 2015.

[^19]: ‘Spatial History Project’,
    http://web.stanford.edu/group/spatialhistory/cgi-bin/site/project.php?id=1063.

[^20]: This type of spatialization is often used in analysis of novels,
    especially adventurous. Susan Piedmont-Palladino, ‘Intelligent
    Cities’, in *National Building Museum*, 2011, 36-41.

[^21]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77680_3983396227 .anchor} ‘Disaster
    Simulation’,
    https://tangible.media.mit.edu/project/disaster-simulation/.

[^22]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77634_3983396227 .anchor} McKenzie Wark,
    *Molecular Red: Theory for the Anthropocene*, London: Verso, 2015.

[^23]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77636_3983396227 .anchor} Toscano and
    Kinkle, *Cartographies of the Absolute*.

[^24]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77630_3983396227 .anchor} Antoni Moore and
    Igor Drecki, *Geospatial Visualisation,* Berlin, Springer, 2011.

[^25]: K.C. Clarke, ‘Advances in Geographic Information Systems’,
    *Computers, Environment and Urban Systems* Vol. 10 (1986): 175–184;
    V. Maliene, V. Grigonis, V. Palevičius, and S. Griffiths,
    ‘Geographic information system: Old principles with new
    capabilities’ *Urban Design International*. 16.1 (2011): 1-6;
    Goodchild, ‘Twenty years of progress: GIScience in 2010’.

[^26]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77674_3983396227 .anchor} Matthew Johnson,
    *Ideas of Landscape,* Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2007, 142.

[^27]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77672_3983396227 .anchor} Growing with
    contemporary age, see ‘Geonames’, https://www.geonames.org/.
    Geonames contains nearly nine million toponyms. Besides historical
    and geographical analysis, also a comparative linguistic analysis is
    possible.

[^28]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77670_3983396227 .anchor} ‘Openstreet
    Map:’, https://www.openstreetmap.org/.

[^29]: Kanarinka, ‘The City Formerly Known as Cambridge’,
    http://www.kanarinka.com/project/the-city-formerly-known-as-cambridge/kanarinka.
    ‘The City Formerly Known as Cambridge is a useless map by the
    Institute for Infinitely Small Things. Michael, *GeoHumanities*.

[^30]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77612_3983396227 .anchor} Susan Sontag, *On
    Photography,* London: Penguin Books, 1978.

[^31]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77632_3983396227 .anchor} Also Yahoo Maps,
    OpenStreetMap, Bing Live Map.

[^32]: ‘Google Earth Engine’, https://earthengine.google.com.

[^33]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77650_3983396227 .anchor} When GIS become
    integrative, thus linking to sources such as Wikipedia.

[^34]: Katherine Hayles, ‘Print Is Flat, Code Is Deep: The Importance of
    Media-specific Analysis’, *The Poetics Today* 25.1 (2004): 67-90.

[^35]: Hayles, *Print is Flat,* 77.

[^36]: Hayles, *Print is flat. *

[^37]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77466_3983396227 .anchor} As the resolution
    of images constantly changes, the image with the highest resolution
    is a breakable border. At this point, in early 2019, the highest
    resolution recorded is the image of Mont Blanc, recorded in 365 giga
    pixels.
