---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Chapter 7: PERSPECTIVAL LOSSES

Hyperimages are assembled from many computed and corrected photographs.
Because of this, they lack any one specific point of view (POV) as well
as angle of view (AOV) or field of view (FOV). In other words, the such
images do not allow for the possibility of a subjective view. Rather,
they are computed based on the differential parallax between
stereoscopic pairs, or the apparent displacement of the position of an
object, such as the Earth’s surface, in respect to a reference point or
system, when viewed from various positions of observation.

[[]{#_Toc32255890 .anchor}]{#_Toc31046562 .anchor}Figure 26: Clement
Valla, Postcard from Google Earth - 40°50'41.94"N,73°54'42.33"W
(courtesy of the artist)

The combining of geographical and geological images, maps, and
photographs is today mostly done automatically. Yet, problems arise from
such computational techniques. Using artificial intelligence, many
different and diverse images can be computed and combined into a total
image. fuse can calculate and fuse many images to produce a map-alike
imaging. Such AI-based software includes, for example, the NASA Ames
Stereo Pipeline (ASP), which merges a large amount of satellite images;
Skycatch, a drone image processing platform; and Altizure, a community
for realistic 3D modelling; to name but a few.[^1] Google Earth Engine
also assembles together aerial photography, geological information
system data, and satellite photography. Yet, problems arise from such
computational techniques.

Machine vision, like human vision, has its own specific errors. What
computer scientists call ‘glitches’ are often the result of some failure
of a machine to execute the commands which we instruct it with, as
machines have completely different way of operating than humans do. But
artificial intelligence, because it is synthetic, does not automatically
check for its own errors. Rather, AI can only detect errors in the
imaging process through glitches in the image structure.[^2] Clement
Valla, an artist who catalogues errors in the computations of Google
programs which combine different images, has demonstrated in his serial
*Postcard from Google Earth*, how many such glitches may have certain
visual features in common.[^3] Valla’s series of artworks embody what
Keller Easterling once observed: that disruptions, dissensus, and
discrepancy are all contradictions in the structure of space.[^4] In
Valla’s art, Google’s software is shown to have failed to recognize the
pattern of a road or railway, building or bridge, having morphed such
forms in accordance with the landscape. Therefore, Lawrence Bird
concludes that:

> \[I\]t is not a coincidence that these images, which record
> elaborations and disruptions in the infrastructure of a city, also
> evince ruptures in its image. These images are sewn together by the
> machinery of Google Earth from multiple satellite images taken at
> different times.[^5]

This total image is an image which is fractioned, segmented, sewn, and
even partially invented. It does not form any unitary visual system. Or,
as Angela Krewani writes, ‘Google Earth disjoins the experience of a
planet earth into fractured smithereens of planetary knowledge’.[^6]
Yet, it is not only that Google Earth which produces spatial deviations,
but the employing photography without its original, linear perspective
system. Computational photography, rather than serving as a tool for the
analysis of space, actually produces a new category of space. This total
image space exists independently of any given subject or subjective
perception. And neither is it singular nor objective.

## Medieval Perspective

Given of the complex, assemblage effect in some images, authors such as
Clemena Antonova and Martin Kemp, among others, look to the perspectival
systems of the Medieval Period in their analysis of perspective, and
these are of crucial importance in the post-digital age. [^7] Rudolf
Arnheim terms such a perspective ‘inverse perspective’,[^8] Clemena
Antonova ‘reverse perspective’,[^9] and John White ‘divergent
perspective’.[^10] This perspectival system, in contrast to those which
are more ‘analytic’ or ‘synthetic’, if the view is from above, has more
in common with the ‘complex’ and ‘oblique’ view. [^11] As most of these
authors consider this type of perspective to have already existed since
Greek scenography in Antiquity, but to have reached its peak in
Byzantine and Medieval icons, it is often referred to as – Medieval
perspective.

During the Medieval Period, namely, Christian thinkers commonly thought
of God as the guarantor of the existence of space, including those
spaces which are not immediately perceivable, such as spaces in the past
or at a distance. Therefore, for visual representations, various spatial
views had to be conjoined in order to produce a space as would be viewed
both by God and humans, which in turn introduced into images both past
and distant spaces through the logic of assemblage. This perspective
system, also known as ‘orthodox isometric’, shows the parallels of an
object as diverging into the distance, thus allowing the viewer to see
both sides of an objects. In orthodox isometric perspective, the artist
or image-maker depicts objects which are farther away as larger in size
and closer objects as smaller. In many instances, the so-called ‘rule of
the bottom’ is applied as well, whereby objects which stand on the
ground are depicted as either larger in the foreground or smaller in the
background of the image. Finally, the scene is often viewed from an
elevated or even eye-in-the-sky position, and it is this in particular
which connects Medieval Perspective to the aerial photography of today.

In the pre-linear perspective systems of the Medieval Period,
distortions or glitches are most visible when there are straight lines
in the composition, such as with the building architecture of an urban
scene. This perspective, according to Lev Zhegin, produces distortions
in the view like that those which occur when looking through a telescope
or barrel.[^12] Also known as ‘Byzantine perspective’, in this inverse
or inverted perspective system, straight lines curve into concave ones,
while convex lines become straight lines, according Fernando C. Casas.
[^13]

This so-called curvilinear perspective is when straight lines do not
meet but foreshortening exists in all directions. According to White,
Leonardo da Vinci defined this perspective in his now-lost manuscript
*Discorso*, at least as the story was told by Benvenuto Cellini.[^14]
Although James Elkins argues that Leonardo’s descriptions could also
have matched three-point linear perspective.[^15] With this perspective
system, the image is perfectly projected onto the sphere of the eye,
given that the shape of the inner eye is concave too, leading Erwin
Panofsky to conclude our vision is spheroid or tunneling. [^16] Images,
namely fall on the retina that is concave, producing a subjective,
perspectival view which is then convex (And this is also what happens in
representations of the planet by the Flat Earthers. compose such a
shape, a convex shape is transitioned into a flat shape.)

## 

## Linear Perspective 

Medieval perspective is usually contrasted with linear perspective,
which creates an illusion of depth on a flat surface through a system of
parallel lines or orthogonals which converge in a single vanishing point
on the composition’s horizon line. Inverse perspective, because it is
not truly systematic, is commonly described in contrast to linear
perspective, which Arnheim also calls the ‘illusionist doctrine’.[^17]
But were the perspective systems of the Medieval Period really
perspective systems at all? Some art historians suggest that the
perspective of the Medieval Period is but a ‘twisted’ or ‘warped’
representation of the way vision works. And some further deny the
category of systems which might be called perspectival to the East. Such
authors find that the reasons for the visible distortion of space in the
Medieval Period rest upon the logics of iconographic symbolism and
hierarchies of visual rhetoric, rather than an organized way of
presenting. Whereas, as John Berger notes, the historical moment when
linear perspective was introduced, given its basis in mathematics rather
than in symbolism, also introduced a profane view into art, image
making, and our representations of the world.[^18]

According to Pavel Florensky, linear perspective is based on six
conditions which are presumed to define reality.[^19] First, the world
itself is not organized as a Euclidian space and any space made through
geometry is going to be different from the space which is actually seen.
Second, there is no absolute point of view or center for perspective.
Third, the way of seeing which is provided to the viewer in reality is
binocular. Fourth, the viewer, or eye of the beholder, in reality is
fluxing not fixed like it is in an image. Moreover, fifth, while an
image is static, the world itself is not. And finally, all
psycho-physiological processes are excluded from linear perspective, as
he writes;

> The eye looks motionlessly and dispassionately, the equivalent of an
> optical lens. \[…\] Moreover, this looking is accompanied by neither
> memories, nor spiritual exertions, nor recognition. It is an
> external-mechanical process, at the most a physio-chemical one, but in
> no way is it that which is called vision. The whole psychic element of
> vision, and even the physiological one, are decisively absent.[^20]

During the Renaissance, an artist could apply linear perspective in an
image in order to describe both the scene as well as the position of the
narrator. When viewed from the vantage point of the narrator, the scene
is then seen all at once, perceived by the audience as being fixed and
having existed prior to the action itself of viewing the artwork. Linear
perspective, since its development in the Renaissance, has consisted of
the geometric projection of three dimensions onto a two-dimensional
plane. This, in turn, has supported the mathematization and,
consequently, the rationalization of observed space. Such a view has
been further revolutionized by the invention of new techniques and
tools. For example, as Friedrich Kittler describes, in the mid-18^th^
century the ruler invented by Alsatian Johann Heinrich Lambert, today
known as ‘Lambert’s ruler’, assisted in the calculations of perspective
for scenes of the open landscape.[^21]

## Technical Perspective

Already in Antiquity, optical research was initiated to orient to
measure reality, reaching its peak with the discovery of Renaissance
perspective, and at least being mechanical realized with the invention
of photography. Although it was not the camera obscura itself, which was
the direct precursor of the photographic camera, but rather camera
lucida and lanterna magica, used as perspectival tools, which first
offered a geometrically correct translation of reality.[^22] The
photographic camera itself would be more accurate than any previous tool
as aperspectival device. Soon after the invention of the technology and
the medium, photography was accepted as a more perfect way of seeing
than even human vision which itself suffers from parallax confusion,
overlapping images received through two eyes as sources, producing a
third one. Monocular vision of the camera presented the *finnisage* of
development of visual representational media. Because of its
monocularity, photography had a high capacity for representing a
three-dimensional reality without additionally coding it, as it would by
producing yet another set of symbols.

However, there are also significant differences between the pictorial
perspective of a painting painterly and mechanical perspective of the
photo camera. A painted image can lose perspective for various reasons,
Rudolf Arnhem analyses, such as if the painter lacks skills, has chosen
not to adopt the canon of fundamental principles and general rules, has
a perceptive error, paints only what they think they see, or has an
unusual angle of view. [^23] But such distortions to the perspective do
not so easily happen with the creation of a mechanical image. Unless the
photographer intentionally creates some distortion or other, images
taken with a camera will all record relatively the same reality. Yet,
what is recorded may still not impact the beliefs of the photographer,
so if the photographer thinks that they have recorded UFOs, there may be
no way to employ the image to contest this belief.

Photographic metrology, or the science of measurement in photography, is
defined by at least three elements: the depth of the field, the ordering
of planes, and the metric or proportion of the composition. Beyond any
the interpretation of the angle of view, together these elements can
convey to the viewer the relationship between objects in the image, as
well as the relative distance to the subject or photographer from their
position in space. And all three elements, distance, plane, and
measurement, can be modified or even distorted through the use of
various lenses. Still, there are many differences between this
perspective which is recorded by a camera and that which is produced by
the eye. One key difference, as Vasco Ronchi elaborates, lies in the
fact that the photographic camera is set in front of the eyes but not
necessarily having neutral lenses (although 50 mm lenses are often taken
to be a model of neutral sight).[^24]

## View from Above

The aerial view has changed our perspective on the world. Since the
beginning of perspective systems in Western culture during the
Renaissance, as Antoine Bousquet remarks, two different perspective
systems have been developed: a linear and a military perspective, with a
military perspective supporting the aerial view.[^25] Linear perspective
was based on the representation of architectural structures within a
geometrically-designed space, like with Renaissance paintings in which
all lines meet at the vanishing point. In contrast, military perspective
was based on the second perspective depicted space the way two parallel
lines stay parallel and thus they never meet, like with a surveying map.
This was the perspective system of the aerial view, Bousquet
claims.[^26] It contained neither infinite points nor straight lines and
has only a single plane.[^27] From down on the ground, space was seen
like a pyramid, with the biggest plane that of the Earth’s surface, and
the smallest plane that of the Earth’s sky or atmosphere. Whereas from
up in the sky, perspective was reversed, with the biggest plane the sky,
and the smallest the surface. Further, in the absence of architecture,
which frames the space, this view could not include the measurement of
distance. Thus, from the aerial view, the observable world had no depth
of the field, order of planes, proportional rules, or a view angle. In
other words, the Earth become approximate and unmeasurable.

There are further elements which distinguish the aerial view from linear
perspective. Linear perspective is defined by both a horizon and
pictorial vanishing point. While horizon exists in reality, the
vanishing point, which does not exist in the real world, but it is tied
to the image space where serving the simulation of the third dimension
on the flat surface. Without a horizon, it is difficult to determine
vanishing point as well as the relative distance between the subject and
the horizon. But in aerial photography, the vanishing point is
independent from the horizon, or the horizon is completely missing.
Often, the viewer’s eye is even located below the horizon line, which
distorts the perspective.[^28]

  ----------------------- --------------- ------------ --------------
                          MAPS            LAND PHOTO   ORTHOPHOTO
  SPACE DESCRIPTION       Space           Place        Larger space
  VIEWER POSITIONING      Distributed     Fixed        Distributed
  CONSTRUCTION            Discreet        Compact      Compact
  VISUAL CHARACTERISTIC   Abstraction     Realism      Realism
  VISUAL STUDIES          Visualization   Vision       Vision
  ----------------------- --------------- ------------ --------------

[[]{#_Toc32170951 .anchor}]{#_Toc26 .anchor}Table 6: Comparison of
qualities which characterize maps, land photographs, and aerial
photographs

## Photographic Polyperspectivalism 

While photographic technology in and of itself is a perspectival
machine, the medium also enabled artists to experiment with perspective.
In the 19^th^ century, the first polyperspectival experiments were
conducted by the Pictorialists, who montaged several photographs
together in order to produce complex stories such as simulating the
existence of ghosts. The most famous mechanics or ‘monteurs’ in
photographic technology, however, remain Eadweard Muybridge,
Etienne-Jules Marey and, around the same time or just a bit later,
Harold Edgerton with his stroboscopic photography. Both Muybridge and
Marey used photography to analyze time. Although, each did so in their
own distinct way. Muybridge, for example, used a set of twelve cameras
to analyze the movements of an animal or human in sequence, by shooting
with multiple cameras, which he distributed in space. Whereas, Marey
used multiple exposures to produce an effect of simultaneity. These
experiments directly led to the development of photogrammetry (through
the construction of the multiplexing camera, like the one Muybridge
used) as well as deep photography (through sub-sequential same-frame
recording)., Félix Nadar also combined multiple images which had been
recorded in sequence while on the move, in order to create the most
total image possible in the day of the Earth as seen from the air. But
while Muybridge’s and Marey’s images were organized around the spatial
third dimension (the movement of the subject through space), Nadar’s
revealed the fourth dimension of the space-time continuum (the
polyperspective simultaneity across time).[^29]

Because of their polyperspective simultaneity, Nadar’s aerial
photographs had a direct influence on the birth of Cubism.[^30] These
images taken up in the sky broke with the Renaissance system of
organizing the image-space down on the ground into linear perspective.
Artists working in this style depicted objects in their artworks
‘relatively \[…\] from several points, no one of which has exclusive
authority’.[^31] Theses Cubists, especially Analytical Cubists, used
polyperspective to bring different views of the subject, whether objects
or figures, together within a single composition. This resulted in
images which appear to be fragmented or somehow abstracted. Through such
polyperspectivalism, a different perspective is applied to each object.
Through a simultaneous view, here the author and their subjectivity were
abstracted out of and away from the image.

Around the same time as the Cubist art movement, experiments with
computing the image were also being conducted by photographers such as
Laszlo Moholy-Nagy, Man Ray, and Christian Schad.[^32] Indeed, since
Cubism, many artists across the late 20^th^ and early 21^st^ centuries
have investigated the role of perspectival systems in the photographic
medium, interrupting, manipulating, or even reversing the process of
image-making in some way, in order to explore the potentials and
possibilities of perspective. These experiments perhaps culminated with
the rise of computational photography in works by Herbert W. Franke, and
Sonia Landy Sheridan, among others. And today, in the post-digital era,
as computational photography flourished, this polyperspectivalism
supports the innovation of total images which encompass many different
points of view.[^33]

## ‘New Medievalism’

The total image, while it is a derivative of photography, does not
satisfy any of conditions for linear perspective, as set by
Florensky.[^34] Total images deny the absolute point of view, the center
of perspective introduces more or many viewpoints distributed along the
surface, and most commonly the viewer cannot stay fixed to the scene,
and the image is anything but static.[^35] As a direct consequence of
this merging of a vast amount of photographic imagery and data, the
polyperspectivalism is being revived. There are many simultaneous views,
and they are all dynamic. One single reality may be experienced in a
multitude of ways, which in turn produces multiple realities, each
providing a coherent picture. Because the basic sense-data interface
with polyperspectival systems is produced by visual sense data which has
been detached from the other senses, a feeling of immersion in this
reality is provided to the viewer or interactor.

Prior to the Renaissance, in non-linear perspectives space was chaotic.
Still, a new polyperspectival space is not inconsistent and incoherent
as a space Panofsky recognizes as once was Medieval.[^36] Besides, the
perspective of the total image is not a priori eternal, transcendent, or
unchangeable without points of reference or parameters of space, like in
the Medieval Period. Rather, the total image is computed out of many
parts or pieces; it is assembled.[^37] This new polyperspectivalism
gives birth as well to a pseudo-philosophy, in which knowledge both
objective and neural is understood to be relativistic. Like reverse
perspective in the Medieval Period, linear perspective in the
Renaissance, absolute perspective in the Baroque, and the mechanical
perspective of photographic technology beginning in the 19^th^ century,
the assemblage logic of polyperspectivalism logic in the post-digital
era characterizes and constrains our capacity for understanding the
world. In such total images, the techniques which are used to correct
many original photographs in the process of composing one single image
of the Earth as seen from above, also dismiss the role and importance of
subjectivity and relativity. As Martin Jay notes, even before our
entrance into the post-digital, ‘If postmodernism teaches anything,
however, it is to be suspicious of single perspectives, which, like
grand narratives, provide totalizing accounts of a world too complex to
be reduced to a unified point of view’.[^38]

In the Renaissance, the centering of images from the viewpoint of the
subject also indicated the rising significance of the self and of the
individual. And in the post-digital era, the separation of images from
subjects may very well suggest the rise of a new amalgamated, generic,
or homogeneous selfhood. Thus, from all of the elements which
characterize the total image, perhaps most important is the
re-distribution of multiple perspectives into a polyperspectival view.
Through this process, post-digital photography loses the mechanical
perspective which describes not the view angle of any one single
subject, but in fact returns to a way of seeing from before the
invention of linear perspective. For example, panoramic images are made
through recording a series of photographs with overlapping borders. And
aerial images are made through recording a series of photographs with
orthographic correction. Viewing such images can even cause dizziness or
even more serious neurological effect.[^39]

As many authors of perspective theory have emphasized, perspective is
not merely a system for visual representation, but also a system of
understanding the world, a discourse unto itself. According to
Cristoforo Landino, for example, perspective is ‘part philosophy and
part geometry,’ used to not only to inform our representation of space,
but to influence our ideology about place as well.[^40] Since Plato’s
allegory of the cave, optical principles and perspectival tools have
served to create paradigms of explanation within the context of
ideological production, as has been analyzed, for example, in
photography and cinema through Marxist theory as well as contemporary
theories of the apparatus.[^41] Essentially, through a given perspective
system, the viewer accepts the position which someone else has created,
identifies with it, and accepts its gaze, even if that gaze is
misogynistic or racist, for example. Still, whereas the viewer can
resist the fullest absorption into cinematic experience, doing so with
intense virtual realities becomes more difficult, and this is why some
virtual perspectives out of total experience may become total
explanations, as theories of flat earth.[^42]

[^1]: ‘Stereopipeline’,
    https://ti.arc.nasa.gov/tech/asr/groups/intelligent-robotics/ngt/stereo/;
    ‘Skycatch’, https://www.skycatch.com; ‘Altizure’,
    https://www.altizure.com

[^2]: Facebook recently added software which is able to recognize deep
    fakes, which are created through a type of artificial intelligence
    called generative adversarial networks (GAN), by detecting glitches
    in these images of nonexistent people.

[^3]: See, for example: Jessica Becking, ‘Records of Representation:
    Clement Valla’s Postcards from Google Earth’, *Media Theory* 2.1
    (2018): 307-315. Further, other artworks made using Google Earth
    demonstrate how the inspiration for representational art may include
    not only concrete reality, but also mediated supra-reality. A number
    of artists use visuals which are realistic, even indexical, from
    Google Earth. These artists include, for example, Benjamin Grant,
    who composes satellite abstractions on his blog and in his book
    *Overview*, as well as Mishka Henner. In the artworks of both of
    these artists, among others, the world retains its recognizable
    curvature but is flattened through the use of an aerial view angle.
    In contrast, Kenny Jacqui, whose artwork *The Agoraphobic Traveler*
    is based on capturing images from Google Street View rather than
    Google Earth, includes prints of photos taken with large open-air
    distances in a low oblique view of urban settlements. Therefore,
    unlike Grant and Henner, but like to the artwork by Trevor Paglen,
    Jacqui’s art includes the curvature of a horizon.

[^4]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77644_3983396227 .anchor} Keller Easterling,
    *Extrastatecraft: The Power of Infrastructure Space*, London: Verso,
    2014.

[^5]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77642_3983396227 .anchor} Lawrence Bird,
    ‘Territories of Image: Disposition and Disorientation in Google
    Earth’, in Steve Hawley, Edward M. Clift, Kevin O’Brien (eds),
    *Imaging the City: Art, Creative Practices and Media Speculations*,
    Bristol: Intellect, 2016, 19.

[^6]: Angela Krewani, ‘Google Earth: Satellite Images and the
    Appropriation of the Divine Perspective’, in Solvejg Nitzke and
    Nicolas Pethes (eds), *Imaging Earth: Concepts of Wholeness in
    Cultural Constructions of Our Home Planet,* Berlin: Transcript
    Verlag, 2018, 58.

[^7]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77546_3983396227 .anchor} Clemena Antonova,
    ‘On the Problem of “Reverse Perspective”: Definitions East and
    West’, *Leonardo* 43.5 (2010): 464-469.

[^8]: Arnheim, ‘Inverted Perspective in Art’.

[^9]: Antonova, ‘On the Problem of “Reverse Perspective”’.

[^10]: John White, *Birth and Rebirth of Pictorial Space,* Cambridge,
    MA: Belknap Press, 1987.

[^11]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77532_3983396227 .anchor} Yet, some authors
    criticize the imposition of a Western, linear perspective, because
    as the criteria of definition of visual representation preceding its
    era, as well as the norm that any representation is necessarily
    realistic.

[^12]: Zhegin from Antonova. See: Clemena Antonova, *Space, Time and
    Presence of the Icon, Seeing the World in the Eyes of God*, Martin
    Kemp (pref.), London and New York: Routledge, 2010.

[^13]: Fernando C. Casas, ‘Flat-Perspective Sphere’, *Leonardo* 16.1
    (Winter 1983): 1-9.

[^14]: White, *Birth and Rebirth of Pictorial Space.*

[^15]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77538_3983396227 .anchor} White, *Birth and
    Rebirth of Pictorial Space*; James Elkins, ‘Did Leonardo Develop a
    Theory of Curvilinear Perspective? Together with Some Remarks on the
    “Angle” and “Distance” Axioms’, *Journal of the Warburg and
    Courtauld Institutes*[]{#__RefHeading___Toc77536_3983396227 .anchor}
    51 (1988): 190-196.

[^16]: Erwin Panofsky, *Perspective as Symbolic Form*, Christopher S.
    Wood (trans.), New York: Zone Books, 1996.

[^17]: Arnheim, ‘Inverted Perspective in Art’.

[^18]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77560_3983396227 .anchor} John Berger,
    *Ways of Seeing*, New York Penguin, 1972, 16; Also, Haraway has
    named it ‘God’s trick’. See Donna Haraway, ‘The Persistence of
    Vision’, 1997; *The Visual Culture Reader,* Nicholas Mirzoeff (ed.),
    London: Routledge, 2002, 678-684.

[^19]: Pavel Florensky, ‘Reverse Perspective (1920)’, trans. Wendy
    Salmond, in Nicoletta Misler (ed.), *Beyond Vision: Essays on the
    Perception of* Art, London: Reaktion Books, 2002, 197-273.

[^20]: Florensky, ‘Reverse Perspective’, 263.

[^21]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77550_3983396227 .anchor} Friedrich
    Kittler, *Optical Media,* Anthony Enns (trans.), Cambridge: Polity
    Press, 2009, 94-96. According to Kittler, this ruler was a tool
    which assisted in calculating the perspective of any open view of
    the landscape.

[^22]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77558_3983396227 .anchor} Berger, *Ways of
    Seeing.*

[^23]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77530_3983396227 .anchor} Arnheim,
    ‘Inverted Perspective in Art’, 125.

[^24]: Vasco Ronchi, ‘Perspective Based on a New Optics’, *Leonardo* 7.3
    (Summer, 1974): 219-225.

[^25]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77554_3983396227 .anchor} Bousquet, *The
    Eyes of War*, 36.

[^26]: Bousquet, *The Eyes of War*.

[^27]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77552_3983396227 .anchor} Bousquet, *The
    Eyes of War*.

[^28]: Such a view is frequent in panoramic photography, where the focus
    for the photographer as well as the audience is on the clearness of
    the land rather than the infiniteness of the sky.

[^29]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77526_3983396227 .anchor} Space-time
    continuum is also shown in Cubism, while fourth dimension in
    dynamism by Duchamp or Futurism by Balla. See: Linda Dalrymple
    Henderson, ‘Four-Dimensional Space or Space-Time? The Emergence of
    the Cubism-Relativity Myth in New York in the 1940s’, in Michele
    Emmer (ed), *The Visual Mind II*, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005,
    349-398.

[^30]: Other influences on the birth of Cubism included Einstein’s
    theory of relativity, Minkowski’s theory of the space-time
    continuum, and non-Euclidian geometry.

[^31]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77522_3983396227 .anchor} Henderson,
    ‘Four-Dimensional Space or Space-Time?’, 362.

[^32]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77520_3983396227 .anchor} For a brief
    history of these experiments, see: Gottfried Jäger, ‘Generative
    Photography: A Systematic, Constructive Approach’, *Leonardo* 19.1
    (1986): 19-25.

[^33]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77528_3983396227 .anchor} Both definitions
    may be missing the point for two reasons; 1. As they define reverse
    in regard to the linear perspective, presupposing its existence, as
    well as the knowledge on it. 2. Presupposing that the Byzantine
    perspective had a systematic rule, as linear had. This argument was
    stressed by Martin Kemp and Clemena Antonova, in ‘Reverse
    perspective’ historical fallacies and an alternative view, in
    Michele Emmer, *Visual Mind II*, Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 2005,
    349-399.

[^34]: Florensky, ‘Reverse Perspective (1920)’.

[^35]: There are a few more conditions, added by Oscar Wulff, that
    define the reverse perspective, one of which is the inclusion of the
    viewer inside of the space, as a part of the pictorial space, as for
    example also in selfies or 360-degree panoramas. See Wuff in
    Antonova, *Space, Time and Presence of the Icon*.

[^36]: Panofsky, *Perspective as Symbolic Form.*

[^37]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77500_3983396227 .anchor} Merleau Ponty
    writes about the ‘“baroque” proliferation of generating axes for
    visibility in the duplicity of the real’. Merleau Ponty, *Visible
    and Invisible*, Northwestern University Press, 1969, 60.

[^38]: Jay, *Downcast Eyes,* 545.

[^39]: Commonly explored as neurological problem in aviation.

[^40]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77498_3983396227 .anchor} Cristoforo
    Landino as quoted in Margaret Iversen, ‘The Discourse of Perspective
    in the Twentieth Century’. *Oxford Art Journal* 28.2 (2005): 191–202

[^41]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77496_3983396227 .anchor} Sarah Kofman,
    *Camera Obscura: of Ideology*, Athlone Press, 1998; Jean-Louis
    Baudry and Alan Williams, ‘Ideological Effects of the Basic
    Cinematographic Apparatus’, *Film Quarterly* 28.2 (1974-1975):
    39-47.

[^42]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77494_3983396227 .anchor} Laura Kurgan
    refers to assemblage function of the trace in writings by Vilėm
    Flusser. Laura Kurgan, *Close Up at a Distance: Mapping, Technology,
    and Politics*, MIT Press, 2013.
