---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Chapter 8: Polyopticon 

## Spinning Around

Google Earth Engine, related products such as Google Maps and Google
Street View, and other aerial, panoramic, and satellite image mapping
programs have opened the door to an era of total surveillance or
so-called ‘deep imaging’.[^1] Alike maps, photographs today have become
a navigable space, as it no longer presents a fixed place. The ancient
dream of being able to see the world like the gods has been realized in
the total image. There are many correlations between the view in the
contemporary aerial photography of the post-digital age and in the
historical perspective systems of the Medieval Period; that is, between
the folkloric, mythological, and religious concept of the omnipresent
eye, and the interventionist concept of the evil eye. And especially
during times of nation-state interventionism, these views are used to
manipulate an economy, people, or society.[^2] During the 19^th^
century, for example, two models of control were conceived: the
panopticon and the peep show. The panopticon, which in a sense also
imprisoned the guards, began as an architectural blueprint for prisons,
based on an idea of control through presence and visibility. It was
first sketched by Samuel Bentham and published in a book by his brother
Jeremy.[^3] After the invention and implementation of the panopticon,
peep show marked the second such surveillance model, in which the
observer was positioned outside of the system, thus was invisible to the
object monitored. The principle difference between the two was the
position of the observer. With the panopticon, a design for
institutional buildings such as prisons which consist of a rotunda with
an inspection house at the center, control is achieved from above and
inside of the system. Whereas with the peep show, an exhibition of
pictures viewed through a small hole or magnifying glass, control is
achieved from outside while freely moving about.

With the birth of aerial photographs, these two ways of seeing, one from
the inside of an architectural construct, and one from the outside, were
merged. With aerial images the observer is having a full control of the
area under it, as in panopticon, yet, he is not locked down into a
building of a prison. Prison keeper is having an immediate insight into
much wider reality than the one being represented by the author of the
image and imagined by the perception of the audience.

The ideas of space which are being represented in today’s aerial, drone,
and satellite post-digital photography may to a certain extent be like
the ideas of space defined in the mythologies of Antiquity and in the
religion of the Medieval Period. But this technology is far from
all-seeing (omnipresent) or all-knowing (omniscient). Instead, it allows
various agents to simultaneously observe, monitor, and control others.
As this technology becomes more readily available and cost effective, it
also becomes more open, allowing a range of user greater access to the
technology, and with fewer and fewer constraints or restrictions on its
use. For example, drone may be used by a private citizen to invade
another’s privacy. The popular use of this technology, in turn, leads to
questions concerning its legality, especially in terms of the privacy
and property. On a daily basis, American citizens and non-citizens are
being surveilled by drones in the USA, and not only by the military or
state, but also by private individuals.[^4] And artists also use drones
in their art, as with John Carlucci and Brandon LaGanke of Ghost + Cow
who in their art-porn project *Drone Boning* filmed people having sex
from the air.[^5]

For this distribution of monitoring devices, contemporary paradigm of
control is more distorted, fragmented, and simultaneous than Bentham’s
panopticon or Foucault’s panopticonism. Bruno Latour defines it as
‘oligoptic organization’, consisting of numerous small chunks that do
their small surveillances.[^6] The key difference between Foucault’s
panopticon and Latour’s oligopticon lies in whether the data is
centralized or decentralized. Merging both together, in what Zygmunt
Bauman defines as ‘liquid control’, is the simultaneous implementation
of the synopticon defined by Thomas Mathiesen and Foucault’s panopticon,
producing something as a polyopticon, which simultaneously surveilles at
small and at large.[^7]

## Machine Gods

As today ‘corporations replace the Christian churches as the primary
source of aerial integration’, the system of airplanes, drones, and
satellites is also polycentric.[^8] In the post-digital era, the forces
of the universe which humans have previously attributed to deities,
gods, or other spiritual beings, are more and more being attributed to
machines. Indeed, one could perhaps go so far as to say that machines
are becoming gods in the minds and hearts of many if not most people,
and that humans have dethroned god, and replaced him with a machine. The
acts of surveillance and judgement are just some of these god-like
powers, which humans previously attributed to some god or other, and
presently attribute to aerial photography. But the total image does not
emerge from a natural way of seeing which has evolved gradually through
use over time.

Rather, the machine gaze behind the total image has replaced the
metaphysical ‘eye in the sky’ which previously belonged the exclusively
to the domains of folklore, mythology, and religion, by taking up a
point of view from the higher dimensions of the stratosphere and outer
space, from which it achieves a kind of total seeing. Such a gaze
affords multiple operations, with a capacity for a 360-degree view,
telephoto zooming by astronomical units, and focus simultaneously at far
and near distances. Imaging systems today differ from those yesterday
primarily in regard to the type of surveillance which is being
established.[^9] For example, it has now become possible to zoom in and
out of a map almost instantaneously, and to almost synchronically
experience both panoptic and synoptic vision.

Unmanned photography, getting rid of the human as the first, named,
author (the one that presses the button) and leaving him the function of
the second author working behind (as the creator or the programmer of
the apparatus), tries to remain itself in the objective place, reducing
any trajectory and abstract distortion of the located and situated
object’s space. The author now infiltrates or invades the audience
space, while the image space manipulates the audience through the
illusion that they are having an exchange or interaction with the
author. Further, each individual of the audience is continuously being
mapped and datafied by the system itself, generating new content around
about their place. Moreover, systems for the viewing and monitoring of
others have been perfected, and now have come into the hands of the
masses, who share their own as well as others’ private data without a
second thought.

## Viewer Tracked

Yet, contemporary surveillance seems to be at least partially voluntary,
as humans provide a great deal of this information themselves. And in
the Quantified Self movement, which is fast gaining popularity, all data
is provided voluntarily. As Matthew H. Wilson notes, ‘Quantification, as
an interoperable, proprietary system that fashions habits and surveils
for the purpose of competition, is life lived under spectacle’.[^10]

The subject in the post-digital era is not whole unto themselves, in the
eye of a machine, but rather consists of discreet elements such as
number of steps, calories lost, weight, height, time spent online, DNA,
pin codes, passwords, facial features, and on. Healthcare applications
such as pedometers and cardiograph heart rate monitors for smart phones
or smart watches at once connect us to and dissociate us from our own
bodies. And with the increasing use of web mapping services and
applications, we are losing our primordial connection to the Earth.
Although these may situate us within our environment, we have no big
picture, no navigational instinct. In each of these systems, the place
is over-produced. That is, the same location is covered by views from
satellite, GPS trackers for cars, and mobile trackers for personal
devices. We live in a time where the majority of our devices, which
extend the functions of our perception, also serve to locate us as dots
within a Cartesian coordinate system. While previously maps were placing
oneself on the space by the act of use, now the map places the users
without their knowledge, simultaneously providing seducing total images
of space.

Not only personal data but also real-time is transmitted through our
devices to various trackers, broadcasting GPS information to cellular
stations and to internet servers. Indeed, data has become more valuable
than even oil in the post-digital age. After the 2018 scandal with
Cambridge Analytica, which harvested personal data from social media in
order to manipulate election outcomes for various clients, it has become
clear that data is itself a currency. Game applications on social
networks provide our data to commercial companies, for example.[^11] And
today, it is even possible to exercise surveillance on oneself, whether
with a 24-hour webcam or using satellite imagery.

Systems collect more data on us than ever before. Consequently,
surveillance has been modified into ‘dataveillance’ organized around
discursive practices.[^12] As Manuel deLanda writes in his analysis of
work by Gilles Deleuze:

> Non-discursive practices of visual surveillance and monitoring,
> performed in buildings specifically designed to facilitate their
> routine execution, sort the raw materials (human bodies) into
> criminal, medical, or pedagogic categories; and discursive practices,
> like those of the criminologists, doctors, or teachers who produce a
> variety of conceptual categories, consolidate those sorted human
> materials, giving prisons, hospitals and schools a more stable form
> and identity.[^13]

The era of visible totalitarian organization, marching soldiers,
not-that-invisible secret services following, arresting and
interrogating citizens has passed. As totalitarianism reaches the space
beyond visibility, such as the micro and macro, but curiously enough
skip over being visible in everyday life.

## Tracked by the Image

Post-digital photography may also be function as a system of control
through the view or views which they afford. In historical original
photography, the direction for the transaction of value flowed from the
author through the photograph to their audience. That is, the
photographer depicted and framed the content of the image which was then
interpreted by the viewer. In contemporary post-digital photography,
however, the image value is neither unidirectional nor interactive.
Rather, the author of the image is the audience itself, with the content
of the image depending upon the choices made and data given by the
viewer. In other words, the audience has become part of the image in so
far as they are voluntarily or involuntarily recorded while interacting
with the images on some device. And the age-old distinction between the
space of the author, the space of the object, and the space of the
audience has become porous and blurred. There almost seems to be a
certain inverted relation by which the amount of totality of the image
influences on the loss of the particular picture; the more total image
it is offered, lesser the capacity for the picture-view.

[^1]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77448_3983396227 .anchor} Trevor Paglen,
    ‘Homepage’, http://www.paglen.com/.

[^2]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77464_3983396227 .anchor} Jennifer Stob,
    ‘Detournement as Optic: Debord, Derisory Documents and the Aerial
    View’, *Philosophy of Photography* 5.2 (2013): 19-34.

[^3]: Bentham writes in *Panopticon: The Inspection House* written as a
    series of letters in 1787.

[^4]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77434_3983396227 .anchor} See, for example:
    The Electronic Frontier Foundation’s *Map of Domestic Drone
    Authorization*,
    https://fusiontables.googleusercontent.com/embedviz?viz=MAP&q=select+col2+from+1WuTyH62PmUF97oxo6IreT1BL\_aw9HJN5pocwmwg&h=false&lat=44.08758502824518&lng=-85.5615234375&z=4&t=1&l=col2&y=1&tmplt=2.

[^5]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77432_3983396227 .anchor} See John Carlucci
    and Brandon LaGanke (Ghost + Cow), ‘Drone Boning’*,*
    http://www.droneboning.com.

[^6]: Bruno Latour, *Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to
    Actor-Network-Theory*, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007.

[^7]: Zygmunt Bauman, *Liquid Modernity*, Cambridge: Polity Press, 2000.

[^8]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77454_3983396227 .anchor} Barney Warf and
    Santa Arias, *The Spatial Turn: Interdisciplinary Perspectives in
    Human Geography*, New York: Routledge, 2009, 114.

[^9]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77458_3983396227 .anchor} Latour defines the
    oligopticon in contrast to the panorama: ‘Whereas oligoptica are
    constantly revealing the fragility of their connections and their
    lack of control on what is left in between their networks, panoramas
    give the impression of complete control over what is being surveyed,
    even though they are partially blind and nothing enters or leaves
    their walls except interested or baffled spectators’. Bruno Latour,
    *Reassembling the Social,* Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007,
    188.

[^10]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77430_3983396227 .anchor} Matthew H.
    Wilson, *New Lines: Critical GIS and the Trouble of the Map,*
    Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2017.

[^11]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77428_3983396227 .anchor} The information
    being sent out by 24 satellites, allowing precise location of a
    mobile phone between three of them.

[^12]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77426_3983396227 .anchor} Roger A. Clarke,
    ‘Information Technology and Dataveillance’, *Communications of the
    ACM* 31.5 (1988): 498–511.

[^13]: []{#__RefHeading___Toc77424_3983396227 .anchor} deLanda,
    *Assemblage Theory*, 38-39.
